<separator>Neurochemical changes in basal ganglia affect time perception in parkinsonians: Abstract Background Parkinson's disease is described as resulting from dopaminergic cells progressive degeneration, specifically in the substantia nigra pars compacta that influence the voluntary movements control, decision making and time perception. Aim This review had a goal to update the relation between time perception and Parkinson's Disease. Methodology We used the PRISMA methodology for this investigation built guided for subjects dopaminergic dysfunction in the time judgment, pharmacological models with levodopa and new studies on the time perception in Parkinson's Disease. We researched on databases Scielo, Pubmed / Medline and ISI Web of Knowledge on August 2017 and repeated in September 2017 and February 2018 using terms and associations relevant for obtaining articles in English about the aspects neurobiology incorporated in time perception. No publication status or restriction of publication date was imposed, but we used as exclusion criteria: dissertations, book reviews, conferences or editorial work. Results/Discussion We have demonstrated that the time cognitive processes are underlying to performance in cognitive tasks and that many are the brain areas and functions involved and the modulators in the time perception performance. Conclusions The influence of dopaminergic on Parkinson's Disease is an important research tool in Neuroscience while allowing for the search for clarifications regarding behavioral phenotypes of Parkinson's disease patients and to study the areas of the brain that are involved in the dopaminergic circuit and their integration with the time perception mechanisms.

<separator>Adiponectin and adiponectin receptor 1 overexpression enhance inflammatory bowel disease: Abstract Background Adiponectin (ADN) is an adipokine derived from adipocytes. It binds to adiponectin receptor 1 and 2 (AdipoR1 and R2) to exert its function in regulating whole-body energy homeostasis and inflammatory responses. However, the role of ADN-AdipoR1 signaling in intestinal inflammation is controversial, and its role in the regulation of neutrophils is still unclear. Our goal was to clarify the role of AdipoR1 signaling in colitis and the effects on neutrophils. Methods We generated porcine AdipoR1 transgenic mice (pAdipoR1 mice) and induced murine colitis using dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to study the potential role of AdipoR1 in inflammatory bowel disease. We also treated a THP-1 macrophage and a HT-29 colon epithelial cell line with ADN recombinant protein to study the effects of ADN on inflammation. Results After inducing murine colitis, pAdipoR1 mice developed more severe symptoms than wild-type (WT) mice. Treatment with ADN increased the expression of pro-inflammatory factors in THP-1 and HT-29 cells. Moreover, we also observed that the expression of cyclooxygenase2 (cox2), neutrophil chemokines (CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL5), and the infiltration of neutrophils were increased in the colon of pAdipoR1 mice. Conclusions Our study showed that ADN-AdipoR1 signaling exacerbated colonic inflammation through two possible mechanisms. First, ADN-AdipoR1 signaling increased pro-inflammatory factors. Second, AdipoR1 enhanced neutrophil chemokine expression and recruited neutrophils into the colonic tissue to increase inflammation.

<separator>Vasoactive intestinal peptide alleviates osteoarthritis effectively via inhibiting NF-?B signaling pathway: Abstract Background To investigate the treatment effect of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) on osteoarthritis (OA) and the relative mechanism. Method The OA model on the SD rat knee was established using the modified Hulth method, and the recombinant pcDNA3.1+/VIP plasmid was constructed. One month after the plasmids VIP were injected intra-articularly into the right knee joint of OA and sham-operated rats, the pathological changes of the OA knee joint were observed by Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) and Safranin O/fast green staining. The levels of VIP and serum inflammatory cytokines (TNF-a, IL-2 and IL-4) were measured by ELISA kits. Meanwhile, synoviocytes isolated from OA rat and sham-operated rat were cultured in vitro, and transfected with the VIP plasmid. The proliferation of synoviocytes was determined using BrdU kits. The protein expressions of TNF-a, IL-2, CollagenII, osteoprotegerin (OPG), matrix-degrading enzymes (MMP-13, ADAMTS-5), and the related protein of NF-?B signaling pathway (phosphorylated p65, phosphorylated I?Ba) were evaluated by western blot. Results The VIP plasmid could effectively improve the pathological state of the OA rats knee joint, significantly decrease the levels of serum TNF-a and IL-2, and clearly increase the levels of VIP and serum IL-4. At the same time, after the OA synoviocytes were treated with the VIP plasmid, the proliferation ability of OA synoviocytes was reduced, the protein expressions of Collagen II and OPG were remarkably up-regulated, and the protein expressions of TNF-a, IL-2, MMP-13 and ADAMTS-5 were significantly down-regulated. In addition, the p-p65 expression decreased and p-I?Ba expression increased. Conclusion Osteoarthritis was effectively treated by VIP via inhibiting the NF-?B signaling pathway.

<separator>Long non-coding RNA MIAT in development and disease: a new player in an old game: Abstract Background Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are a portion of non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), have manifested a paramount role in the pathophysiology of human diseases, particularly in pathogenesis and progression of disease. Main body of the abstract Myocardial infarction associated transcript (MIAT), which was recently found to demonstrate aberrant expression in various diseases, such as myocardial infarction, schizophrenia, ischemic stroke, diabetic complications, age-related cataract and cancers, is a novel disease-related lncRNA. This work summarize current evidence regarding the biological functions and underlying mechanisms of lncRNA MIAT during disease development. Short conclusion LncRNA MIAT likely represents a feasible cancer biomarker or therapeutic target.

<separator>Mechanisms of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) regulation: clinical impacts in cancer: Abstract Background Limitless self-renewal is one of the hallmarks of cancer and is attained by telomere maintenance, essentially through telomerase (hTERT) activation. Transcriptional regulation of hTERT is believed to play a major role in telomerase activation in human cancers. Main body The dominant interest in telomerase results from its role in cancer. The role of telomeres and telomere maintenance mechanisms is well established as a major driving force in generating chromosomal and genomic instability. Cancer cells have acquired the ability to overcome their fate of senescence via telomere length maintenance mechanisms, mainly by telomerase activation. hTERT expression is up-regulated in tumors via multiple genetic and epigenetic mechanisms including hTERT amplifications, hTERT structural variants, hTERT promoter mutations and epigenetic modifications through hTERT promoter methylation. Genetic (hTERT promoter mutations) and epigenetic (hTERT promoter methylation and miRNAs) events were shown to have clinical implications in cancers that depend on hTERT activation. Knowing that telomeres are crucial for cellular self-renewal, the mechanisms responsible for telomere maintenance have a crucial role in cancer diseases and might be important oncological biomarkers. Thus, rather than quantifying TERT expression and its correlation with telomerase activation, the discovery and the assessment of the mechanisms responsible for TERT upregulation offers important information that may be used for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment monitoring in oncology. Furthermore, a better understanding of these mechanisms may promote their translation into effective targeted cancer therapies. Conclusion Herein, we reviewed the underlying mechanisms of hTERT regulation, their role in oncogenesis, and the potential clinical applications in telomerase-dependent cancers.

<separator>Molecular mechanisms underlying therapeutic potential of pericytes: Abstract Background Pericytes are multipotent cells present in every vascularized tissue in the body. Despite the fact that they are well-known for more than a century, pericytes are still representing cells with intriguing properties. This is mainly because of their heterogeneity in terms of definition, tissue distribution, origin, phenotype and multi-functional properties. The body of knowledge illustrates importance of pericytes in the regulation of homeostatic and healing processes in the body. Main body In this review, we summarized current knowledge regarding identification, isolation, ontogeny and functional characteristics of pericytes and described molecular mechanisms involved in the crosstalk between pericytes and endothelial or immune cells. We highlighted the role of pericytes in the pathogenesis of fibrosis, diabetes-related complications (retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy and erectile dysfunction), ischemic organ failure, pulmonary hypertension, Alzheimer disease, tumor growth and metastasis with the focus on their therapeutic potential in the regenerative medicine. The functions and capabilities of pericytes are impressive and, as yet, incompletely understood. Molecular mechanisms responsible for pericyte-mediated regulation of vascular stability, angiogenesis and blood flow are well described while their regenerative and immunomodulatory characteristics are still not completely revealed. Strong evidence for pericytes' participation in physiological, as well as in pathological conditions reveals a broad potential for their therapeutic use. Recently published results obtained in animal studies showed that transplantation of pericytes could positively influence the healing of bone, muscle and skin and could support revascularization. However, the differences in their phenotype and function as well as the lack of standardized procedure for their isolation and characterization limit their use in clinical trials. Conclusion Critical to further progress in clinical application of pericytes will be identification of tissue specific pericyte phenotype and function, validation and standardization of the procedure for their isolation that will enable establishment of precise clinical settings in which pericyte-based therapy will be efficiently applied.

<separator>Cancer stem cells as key drivers of tumour progression: Abstract Background Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are subpopulations of cancer cells sharing similar characteristics as normal stem or progenitor cells such as self-renewal ability and multi-lineage differentiation to drive tumour growth and heterogeneity. Throughout the cancer progression, CSC can further be induced from differentiated cancer cells via the adaptation and cross-talks with the tumour microenvironment as well as a response from therapeutic pressures, therefore contributes to their heterogeneous phenotypes. Challengingly, conventional cancer treatments target the bulk of the tumour and are unable to target CSCs due to their highly resistance nature, leading to metastasis and tumour recurrence. Main body This review highlights the roles of CSCs in tumour initiation, progression and metastasis with a focus on the cellular and molecular regulators that influence their phenotypical changes and behaviours in the different stages of cancer progression. We delineate the cross-talks between CSCs with the tumour microenvironment that support their intrinsic properties including survival, stemness, quiescence and their cellular and molecular adaptation in response to therapeutic pressure. An insight into the distinct roles of CSCs in promoting angiogenesis and metastasis has been captured based on in vitro and in vivo evidences. Conclusion Given dynamic cellular events along the cancer progression and contributions of resistance nature by CSCs, understanding their molecular and cellular regulatory mechanism in a heterogeneous nature, provides significant cornerstone for the development of CSC-specific therapeutics.

<separator>MEKK1, JNK, and SMAD3 mediate CXCL12-stimulated connective tissue growth factor expression in human lung fibroblasts: Abstract Background In idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, the interaction of CXCL12 and CXC receptor 4 (CXCR4) plays a critical role in lung fibrosis. Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) overexpression underlies the development of pulmonary fibrosis. Our previous report showed that the Rac1-dependent extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and activator protein (AP)-1 pathways are involved in CXCL12-generated CTGF expression in human lung fibroblasts (WI-38). In present study, we additionally inspected the involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1)/JNK-dependent SMAD3 in CXCL12-triggered CTGF expression in WI-38 cells. Methods WI-38 cells were stimulated with CXCL12 in the absence or presence of specific inhibitors or small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). CTGF expression and signaling transduction molecules were assessed by Western blot, luciferase activity assay, or ChIP assay. Results CXCL-12-induced CTGF expression was attenuated by SIS3 (a SMAD3 inhibitor) and SMAD3 siRNA, but not by SB431542 (an activin receptor-like kinase 5, ALK5, inhibitor). CXCL12-stimulated CTGF expression was also attenuated by MEKK1 siRNA. Treatment of cells with CXCL12 caused an increase in SMAD3 phosphorylation at Ser208, translocation to nuclei, SMAD3-luciferase activity, and recruitment of SMAD3 to the CTGF promoter. Stimulation of cells with CXCL12 resulted in increase in JNK phosphorylation at Thr183/Tyr185 and MEKK1 phosphorylation at Thr261. Moreover, CXCL12-mediated SMAD3 phosphorylation or SMAD3-luciferase activity was inhibited by MEKK1 siRNA or SP600125. Finally, CXCL12-mediated JNK phosphorylation was attenuated by MEKK1 siRNA. Conclusion In conclusion, results of this study suggest that CXCL12 activates the MEKK1/JNK signaling pathway, which in turn initiates SMAD3 phosphorylation, its translocation to nuclei, and recruitment of SMAD3 to the CTGF promoter, which ultimately induces CTGF expression in human lung fibroblasts.

<separator>Long non-coding RNA Gas5 regulates proliferation and apoptosis in HCS-2/8 cells and growth plate chondrocytes by controlling FGF1 expression via miR-21 regulation: Abstract Background LncRNA Gas5 is known to be a key control element during growth, differentiation and development in mammalian species. However, the role and function of Gas5 in growth plate chondrocytes has not been determined. Methods The overexpression and knockdown models of Gas5 and miR-21 in cells and animals were constructed. Cell survival was determined by MTT assay and flow cytometry. Animal biochemical indices were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, hematoxylin/eosin staining, immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridisation. Dual luciferase reporter gene assay was carried out to study targeting. Results First, we found the expression levels of fibroblast growth factor 1(FGF1) were up-regulated and miR-21 were down-regulated in Gas5 overexpressing model cells. Meanwhile, the expression levels of FGF1 and Gas5 were up-regulated in miR-21 knockdown model cells. Furthermore, cell proliferation was significantly promoted after Gas5 knockdown or miR-21 overexpression. Subsequently, Gas5 promoted apoptosis, while miR-21 suppressed apoptosis. Animal assays demonstrated that both Gas5 and dexamethasone suppressed proliferation and promoted apoptosis of growth plate chondrocytes, up-regulated FGF1 expression but reduced miR-21 expression. Finally, there was a binding relationship between Gas5, miR-21 and FGF1. Conclusion We concluded that Gas5 regulated proliferation and apoptosis in growth plate by controlling FGF1 expression via miR-21 regulation.

<separator>99mTc-HYNIC-(tricine/EDDA)-FROP peptide for MCF-7 breast tumor targeting and imaging: Abstract Background Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women in the world. Development of novel tumor-specific radiopharmaceuticals for early breast tumor diagnosis is highly desirable. In this study we developed 99mTc-HYNIC-(tricine/EDDA)-Lys-FROP peptide with the ability of specific binding to MCF-7 breast tumor. Methods The FROP-1 peptide was conjugated with the bifunctional chelator hydrazinonicotinamide (HYNIC) and labeled with 99mTc using tricine/EDDA co-ligand. The cellular specific binding of 99mTc-HYNIC-FROP was evaluated on different cell lines as well as with blocking experiment on MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma). The tumor targeting and imaging of this labeled peptide were performed on MCF-7 tumor bearing mice. Results Radiochemical purity for 99mTc-HYNIC-(tricine/EDDA)-FROP was 99% which was determined with ITLC method. This radiolabeled peptide showed high stability in normal saline and serum about 98% which was monitored with HPLC method. In saturation binding experiments, the binding constant (Kd) to MCF-7 cells was determined to be 158 nM. Biodistribution results revealed that the 99mTc-HYNIC-FROP was mainly exerted from urinary route. The maximum tumor uptake was found after 30 min post injection (p.i.); however maximum tumor/muscle ratio was seen at 15 min p.i. The tumor uptake of this labeled peptide was specific and blocked by co-injection of excess FROP. According to the planar gamma imaging result, tumor was clearly visible due to the tumor uptake of 99mTc-HYNIC-(tricine/EDDA)-FROP in mouse after 15 min p.i. Conclusions The 99mTc-HYNIC-(tricine/EDDA)-FROP is considered a promising probe with high specific binding to MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

<separator>Molecular subtyping of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and a microRNA-based prognostic model for distant metastasis: Abstract Background Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly invasive and metastatic cancer, with diverse molecular characteristics and clinical outcomes. This study aims to dissect the molecular heterogeneity of NPC, followed by the construction of a microRNA (miRNA)-based prognostic model for prediction of distant metastasis. Methods We retrieved two NPC datasets: GSE32960 and GSE70970 as training and validation cohorts, respectively. Consensus clustering was employed for cluster discovery, and support vector machine was used to build a classifier. Finally, Cox regression analysis was applied to constructing a prognostic model for predicting risk of distant metastasis. Results Three NPC subtypes (immunogenic, classical and mesenchymal) were identified that are molecularly distinct and clinically relevant, of which mesenchymal subtype (~?36%) is associated with poor prognosis, characterized by suppressing tumor suppressor miRNAs and the activation of epithelial--mesenchymal transition. Out of the 25 most differentially expressed miRNAs in mesenchymal subtype, miR-142, miR-26a, miR-141 and let-7i have significant prognostic power (P?<?0.05). Conclusions We proposed for the first time that NPC can be stratified into three subtypes. Using a panel of 4 miRNAs, we established a prognostic model that can robustly stratify NPC patients into high- and low- risk groups of distant metastasis.

<separator>Comparative genomic analysis of ten clinical Streptococcus pneumoniae collected from a Malaysian hospital reveal 31 new unique drug-resistant SNPs using whole genome sequencing: Abstract Background Streptococcus pneumoniae or pneumococcus is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, specifically in relation to community-acquired pneumonia. Due to the overuse of antibiotics, S. pneumoniae has developed a high degree of resistance to a wide range of antibacterial drugs. Methods In this study, whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed for 10 clinical strains of S. pneumoniae with different levels of sensitivity to standard antibiotics. The main objective was to investigate genetic changes associated with antibiotic resistance in S. pneumoniae. Results Our results showed that resistant isolates contain a higher number of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as compared to susceptible isolates. We were able to identify SNPs that alter a single amino acid in many genes involved in virulence and capsular polysaccharide synthesis. In addition, 90 SNPs were only presented in the resistant isolates, and 31 SNPs were unique and had not been previously reported, suggesting that these unique SNPs could play a key role in altering the level of resistance to different antibiotics. Conclusion Whole genome sequencing is a powerful tool for comparing the full genome of multiple isolates, especially those closely related, and for analysing the variations found within antibiotic resistance genes that lead to differences in antibiotic sensitivity. We were able to identify specific mutations within virulence genes related to resistant isolates. These findings could provide insights into understanding the role of single nucleotide mutants in conferring drug resistance.

<separator>The chondroitin sulfate moiety mediates thrombomodulin-enhanced adhesion and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells: Abstract Background Thrombomodulin (TM), a transmembrane glycoprotein highly expressed in endothelial cells (ECs), is a potent anticoagulant maintaining circulation homeostasis. Under inflammatory states, TM expression is drastically reduced in ECs while vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) show a robust expression of TM. The functional role of TM in VSMCs remains elusive. Methods We examined the role of TM in VSMCs activities in human aortic VSMCs stimulated with platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB). Using rat embryonic aorta-derived A7r5 VSMCs which do not express TM, the role of the chondroitin sulfate (CS) moiety of TM in VSMCs was delineated with cells expressing wild-type TM and the CS-devoid TM mutant. Results Expression of TM enhanced cell migration and adhesion/spreading onto type I collagen, but had no effect on cell proliferation. Knocking down TM with short hairpin RNA reduced PDGF-stimulated adhesion and migration of human aortic VSMCs. In A7r5 cells, TM-mediated cell adhesion was eradicated by pretreatment with chondroitinase ABC which degrades CS moiety. Furthermore, the TM mutant (TMS490, 492A) devoid of CS moiety failed to increase cell adhesion, spreading or migration. Wild-type TM, but not TMS490, 492A, increased focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activation during cell adhesion, and TM-enhanced cell migration was abolished by a function-blocking anti-integrin ß1 antibody. Conclusion Chondroitin sulfate modification is required for TM-mediated activation of ß1-integrin and FAK, thereby enhancing adhesion and migration activity of VSMCs.

<separator>Respiratory syncytial virus prolifically infects N2a neuronal cells, leading to TLR4 and nucleolin protein modulations and RSV F protein co-localization with TLR4 and nucleolin: Abstract Background Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infects the central nervous system, resulting in neurological symptoms. However, the precise underlying pathogenic mechanisms have not been elucidated. In the present study, the infectivity of RSV on N2a neuronal cells and the possible roles of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and nucleolin (C23) during RSV infection were investigated. Methods We compared two experimental groups (infected and non-infected) and monitored the RSV viral titers in the culture supernatant by a viral plaque assay. We also inspected the morphology of the nucleus in infected N2a cells. We measured the level of RSV F protein and studied its co-localization with TLR4 and nucleolin using immunofluorescence assays and laser confocal microscopy. The potential interaction of RSV F protein with TLR4 and nucleolin was examined by coimmunoprecipitation. The expression changes of TLR4, nucleolin, TLR3 and TLR7 proteins in N2a cells and IL-6 and TNF-a in the culture supernatant were investigated by Western Blot analysis and ELISA assay. Changes in neuronal cell apoptosis status was examined by flow cytometry. Results The results demonstrated prolific RSV infection of N2a cells, which triggered a decrease of NeuN protein expression, coinciding with an increase of nuclear lesions, F protein expression, RSV viral titers, and late apoptotic levels of N2a cells. RSV infection induced co-localization of RSV F protein with TLR4 and nucleolin, which could potentially lead to a direct interaction. Furthermore, it was found that TLR4 and nucleolin levels increased early after infection and decreased subsequently, whereas TLR3 and TLR7 expression increased throughout RSV infection. Conclusion The RSV Long strain can prolifically infect N2a neuronal cells, modulating the expression of TLR4 and nucleolin, as well as TLR3, TLR7 and their downstream inflammatory factors, and inducing the co-localization of the RSV F protein with TLR4 and nucleolin.

<separator>Discovery and cellular stress pathway analysis of 1,4-naphthoquinone derivatives with novel, highly potent broad-spectrum anticancer activity: Abstract Background Chemotherapy and targeted therapies have made important strides in cancer treatment yet they often fail and new therapies are still needed. Here, we employed a phenotypic screen to identify and analyze the mechanism of action of novel small molecules that interfere with critical pathways involved in tumor cell growth, using chemoresistant A375 melanoma cells as a model. Methods Cell culture studies were performed in ATCC-recommended media. Compounds, and compound libraries were obtained from Boston University or purchased commercially. Effects on A375 cell viability, proliferation and morphology were determined by Celigo Image Cytometer and viability staining. Anticancer activity of the lead compound was tested in a xenograft nude mouse model. Signaling and cell death pathways were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting, and/or fluorescence microscopy. Results After evaluating 4477 compounds, one hit compound CB533 was identified that caused significant reduction of A375 cell growth. CB533 is an unexplored 1,4-naphthoquinone (NQ) derivative which unlike 1,4-NQ, induced rapid cell death without generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). Structure-activity relationship analysis showed that a pyrrolidine in the 1,4-NQ nucleus in lead compound Pyr-1 yielded optimal activity. CB533 and Pyr-1 had growth-suppressing effects on a large variety of chemotherapy-resistant cancer cell lines in the nano to picomolar range. Pyr-1 also significantly reduced growth of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in nude mice. Pyr-1 rapidly induced activation of major stress pathways and autophagy, which was efficiently blocked by ERK, and somewhat by PI3K inhibitors. Conclusion CB533 and lead Pyr-1 represent novel broad-spectrum, anticancer compounds that are up to 1000-fold more potent than plumbagin, a natural 1,4-NQ with known anticancer activity. Since the growth suppression activities of CB533 and Pyr-1 are unaffected by the chemotherapy resistance of cancer cells, these compounds have promising therapeutic potential. The pyrrolidine in the 3 position of the 1,4-NQ nucleus of Pyr-1 is a critical component of the pharmacophore. Pyr-1-induced cellular stress was mediated by an ERK, and to a lesser extent by an AKT-dependent pathway without involving apoptosis. Our data suggest that Pyr-1 derives its greatly enhanced antitumor activity via mimicking ROS-induced stress signaling without generating ROS, and likely committing cells to autophagy.

<separator>H19 knockdown suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis by regulating miR-148b/WNT/ß-catenin in ox-LDL -stimulated vascular smooth muscle cells: Abstract Background Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified as critical regulators in the development of atherosclerosis (AS). Here, we focused on discussing roles and molecular mechanisms of lncRNA H19 in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) progression. Methods RT-qPCR assay was used to detect the expression patterns of H19 and miR-148b in clinical samples and cells. Cell proliferative ability was evaluated by CCK-8 and colony formation assays. Cell apoptotic capacity was assessed by apoptotic cell percentage and the caspase-3 activity. Bioinformatics analysis, luciferase and RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays were employed to demonstrate cell percentage and the relationship among H19, miR-148b and wnt family member 1 (WNT1). Western blot assay was performed to determine expressions of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), ki-67, Bax, Bcl-2, WNT1, ß-catenin, C-myc and E-cadherin. Results The level of H19 was increased and miR-148b expression was decreased in human AS patient serums and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL)-stimulated human aorta vascular smooth muscle cells (HA-VSMCs). H19 knockdown suppressed proliferation and promoted apoptosis in HA-VSMCs following the treatment of ox-LDL. H19 inhibited miR-148b expression by direct interaction. Moreover, miR-148b inhibitor could reverse the effects of H19 depletion on proliferation and apoptosis in ox-LDL-stimulated HA-VSMCs. Further mechanical explorations showed that WNT1 was a target of miR-148b and H19 acted as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) of miR-148b to enhance WNT1 expression. Furthermore, miR-148 inhibitor exerted its pro-proliferation and anti-apoptosis effects through activating WNT/ß-catenin signaling in ox-LDL-stimulated HA-VSMCs. Conclusion  H19 facilitated proliferation and inhibited apoptosis through modulating WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway via miR-148b in ox-LDL-stimulated HA-VSMCs, implicating the potential values of H19 in AS therapy.

<separator>MicroRNA-365 alleviates morphine analgesic tolerance via the inactivation of the ERK/CREB signaling pathway by negatively targeting ß-arrestin2: Abstract Background Morphine is widely used in clinical practice for a class of analgesic drugs, long-term use of morphine will cause the action of tolerance. MicroRNAs have been reported to be involved in morphine analgesic tolerance.. Methods Forty male SD rats were selected and randomly divided into 5 groups: the control group, morphine tolerance group, miR-365 mimic + morphine (miR-365 mimic) group, miR-365 inhibitor + morphine (miR-365 inhibitor) group and miR-365 negative control (NC)?+?morphine (miR-365 NC) group. After the administration of morphine at 0 d, 1 d, 3 d, 5 d and 7 d, behavioral testing was performed. A dual luciferase reporter gene assay was performed to confirm the relationship between miR-365 and ß-arrestin2, RT-qPCR was used to detect miR-365, ß-arrestin2, ERK and CREB mRNA expressions, western blotting was used to evaluate the protein expressions of ß-arrestin2, ERK, p-ERK, CREB and p-CREB, ELISA was used to detect the contents of IL-1ß, TNF-a and IL-18, while immunofluorescence staining was used to measure the GFAP expression. Intrathecal injection of mir365 significantly increased the maximal possible analgesic effect (%MPE) in morphine tolerant rats. ß-arrestin2 was the target gene of miR-365. Results The results obtained showed that when compared with the morphine tolerance group, there was an increase in miR-365 expression and a decrease in the ß-arrestin2, ERK, CREB protein expressions, contents of IL-1ß, TNF-a, IL-18 and GFAP expression in the miR-365 mimic group, while the miR-365 inhibitor group displayed an opposite trend. Conclusions The results of this experiment suggest that by targeting ß-arrestin2 to reduce the contents of IL-1ß, TNF-a and IL-18 and by inhibiting the activation of ERK/CREB signaling pathway, miR-365 could lower morphine analgesic tolerance.

<separator>Role of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) at medulla in tachycardia induced by repeated administration of ethanol in conscious rats: Abstract Background Intake of ethanol (alcohol) has been shown to influence cardiovascular function; the underlying brain mechanism remains unclear. Noting that nitric oxide (NO) system in the CNS is involved in the regulation of cardiovascular function, the present study examined the role of NO in medulla in ethanol-induced cardiovascular changes. Methods Ethanol was administered by oral gavage at dose of 3.2 g/kg once every day for 8 consecutive days. Changes in blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) in response to ethanol were measured by radiotelemetry method in freely moving female Sprague-Dawley rats. NO modulators were applied by intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection. The protein levels of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and NO content in rostroventral medulla were measured by Western blot and nitrate/nitrite colorimetric assay kit, respectively. Results Ethanol intake had little effects on basal BP and HR following 8 consecutive day treatments. A significant increase in HR but not BP following ethanol intake was observed at 6th and 8th, but not at 1st and 4th day treatments as compared with saline group. A decrease in the protein expression of neuronal NOS (nNOS) but not inducible NOS or endothelial NOS and a decline in the level of NO in the medulla 30 min after ethanol administration was observed at 8th day treatment. ICV treatment with NO donors attenuated ethanol-induced tachycardia effects at 8th day treatment. Ethanol produced significantly tachycardia responses when ICV nNOS inhibitors were given at 1st day treatment. Conclusion Our results suggest that medulla nNOS/NO pathways play an important role in ethanol regulation of HR.

<separator>A novel role of ER stress signal transducer ATF6 in regulating enterovirus A71 viral protein stability: Abstract Background Due to limited coding capacity of viral genome, enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) co-opts host nuclear proteins for its replication. Upon ER stress, the ER-localized 90 kDa activating transcription factor 6 (p90ATF6) is proteolytically cleaved to produce the transcriptionally active amino-terminal 50 kDa (p50ATF6) product where it enters the nucleus to activate a subset of unfolded protein response and ER-associated degradation (also known as ERAD) genes. During EV-A71 infection, however, this p50ATF6 product was not detected in the nucleus, and its downstream target genes were not activated. Methods We examined the role of ATF6 during EV-A71 infection, including its cleavage process and its role in viral life cycle by silencing or overexpressing ATF6. Results We showed that a potential cleavage in the middle of p90ATF6 produced an amino-terminal ~?45 kDa fragment in a viral protease-independent but EV-A71-dependent manner. The disappearance of ATF6 was not restricted to a specific strain of EV-A71 or cell type, and was not simply caused by picornavirus-mediated global translational shutoff. This cleavage of ATF6, which was most likely mediated by the host response, was nevertheless independent of both cellular caspases and XBP1-associated proteasomes. The silencing of ATF6 expression by small interfering RNA suppressed viral titers due to reduced viral protein stability. This effect was markedly restored by the ectopic expression of p90ATF6. Conclusion Our findings indicate that ATF6 plays a distinct role in viral protein stability and that the host uses different cleavage strategies, rather than conventional cleavage by generating p50ATF6, to combat viral infection.

<separator>Unique depot formed by an oil based vaccine facilitates active antigen uptake and provides effective tumour control: Abstract Background Oil emulsions are commonly used as vaccine delivery platforms to facilitate slow release of antigen by forming a depot at the injection site. Antigen is trapped in the aqueous phase and as the emulsion degrades in vivo the antigen is passively released. DepoVax™ is a unique oil based delivery system that directly suspends the vaccine components in the oil diluent that forces immune cells to actively take up components from the formulation in the absence of passive release. The aim of this study was to use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with additional biological markers to evaluate and understand differences in clearance between several different delivery systems used in peptide-based cancer vaccines. Methods C57BL/6 mice were implanted with a cervical cancer model and vaccinated 5 days post-implant with either DepoVax (DPX), a water-in-oil emulsion (w/o), a squalene oil-in-water emulsion (squal o/w) or a saponin/liposome emulsion (sap/lip) containing iron oxide-labeled targeted antigen. MRI was then used to monitor antigen clearance, the site of injection, tumour and inguinal lymph node volumes and other gross anatomical changes. HLA-A2 transgenic mice were also vaccinated to evaluate immune responses of human directed peptides. Results We demonstrated differences in antigen clearance between DPX and w/o both in regard to how quickly the antigen was cleared and the pattern in which it was cleared. We also found differences in lymph node responses between DPX and both squal o/w and sap/lip. Conclusions These studies underline the unique mechanism of action of this clinical stage vaccine delivery system.

<separator>Identification of danthron as an isoform-specific inhibitor of HEME OXYGENASE-1/cytochrome P450 reductase interaction with anti-tumor activity: Abstract Background Heme oxygenase (HO) catalyzes NADPH-dependent degradation of heme to liberate iron, carbon monoxide and biliverdin. The interaction between HO and cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR), an electron donor, is essential for HO activity. HO-1 is a stress-inducible isoform whereas HO-2 is constitutively expressed. HO-1 induction is commonly seen in cancers and impacts disease progression, supporting the possibility of targeting HO-1 for cancer therapy. Methods We employed a cell-based bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assay to screen compounds with ability to inhibit HO-1/CPR interaction. The effect of the identified compound on HO-1/CPR interaction was confirmed by pull down assay. Moreover, the anti-tumorigenic activity of the identified compound on HO-1-enhanced tumor growth and migration was assessed by trypan blue exclusion method and wound healing assay. Results Danthron was identified as an effective small molecule able to interfere with the interaction between HO-1 and CPR but not HO-2 and CPR. Additional experiments with structural analogues of danthron revealed that the positions of hydroxyl moieties significantly affected the potency of inhibition on HO-1/CPR interaction. Pull-down assay confirmed that danthron inhibited the interaction of CPR with HO-1 but not HO-2. Danthron suppressed growth and migration of HeLa cells with stable HO-1 overexpression but not mock cells. In contrast, anthrarufin, a structural analog with no ability to interfere HO-1/CPR interaction, exhibited no significant effect on HO-1-overexpressing HeLa cells. Conclusions These findings demonstrate that danthron is an isoform-specific inhibitor for HO-1/CPR interaction and may serve as a lead compound for novel anticancer drug.

<separator>Mesenchymal stem cells show functional defect and decreased anti-cancer effect after exposure to chemotherapeutic drugs: Abstract Background Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are used for several therapeutic applications to improve the functions of bone, cardiac, nervous tissue as well as to facilitate the repopulation of hematopoietic stem cells. MSC give rise to the non-hematopoietic stromal cells of the bone marrow and are important for the maintenance of normal hematopoiesis. Chemotherapeutic drugs used for treatment of leukemia extensively damage the stromal cells and alter their gene expression profiles. Methods We determined the changes in adipogenic, osteogenic differentiation, phenotypic and gene expression in MSC during treatment with chemotherapeutic drugs cytarabine, daunorubicin and vincristine. We also tested anti-cancer effects of drug treated MSC on leukemia cells. Results Treatment with the chemotherapeutic drugs resulted in functional defects in MSC, leading to reduced proliferation, osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation. The drug treated MSC also showed decreased expression of cell surface receptors, and the changes in proliferation, phenotype and differentiation defect was partially reversible after withdrawing the drugs from the cells. The drug treated MSC showed increased expression of cytokines, IL6, FGF2 and TNFA but reduced levels of differentiation markers SOX9 and ACTC1. Drug treated MSC also contributed to reduced anti-cancer effects in leukemia cells. Conclusions Chemotherapeutic drug treatment altered the phenotype, osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation potential of MSC and modified the gene expression profile of the cells to render them more chemoprotective of the leukemic cells. Thus, additional therapeutic efforts to target the stromal cell population will help in preventing chemoresistance, disease relapse in leukemia and to maintain a healthy bone marrow stroma.

<separator>LncRNA DANCR involved osteolysis after total hip arthroplasty by regulating FOXO1 expression to inhibit osteoblast differentiation: Abstract Background Aseptic loosening of artificial hip joint is a major complication affecting the long-term use of the artificial hip joint, and is the main cause of joint replacement failure. However, the mechanism of aseptic loosening of THR has not yet cleared. The aim of this study was to investigate the underlying mechanism of DANCR in osteoblast differentiation (OD). Methods We detected the expressions of DANCR and FOXO1 in clinical samples and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by qRT-PCR and western blotting. The effects of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) on OD of MSCs were examined by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and Alizarin Red S (ARS) staining. The expressions of OD markers were measured by qRT-PCR and western blotting. The mechanism of DANCR in OD was detected by RNA pull-down, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay and ubiquitination assays. Results Compared with the surrounding normal tissues, DANCR expression was up-regulated and FOXO1 expression was down-regulated in periprosthetic tissues. PMMA suppressed ALP activity, increased DANCR expression, and decreased the expressions of FOXO1, Runx2, Osterix (Ostx) and osteocalcin (OCN). ARS staining showed that PMMA inhibited the OD of MSCs. Knockdown of DANCR attenuated the inhibitory effect of PMMA on OD. Knockdown of FOXO1 could reverse the effect of si-DANC. RNA pull-down and RIP assay implicated that DANCR bound to FOXO1. Ubiquitination assay indicated that si-DANCR could repress Skp2-mediated ubiquitination of FOXO1. Conclusion LncRNA DANCR could inhibit OD by regulating FOXO1 expression.

<separator>Impact of social relationships on Alzheimer's memory impairment: mechanistic studies: Abstract Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by progressive memory and neuronal loss culminating in cognitive impairment that not only affects a person's living ability but also becomes a society's as well as a family's economic burden. AD is the most common form of dementia in older persons. It is expected that the number of people with AD dementia will increase dramatically in the next 30 years, projecting to 75 million in 2030 and 131.5 million in 2050 worldwide. So far, no sufficient evidence is available to support that any medicine is able to prevent or reverse the progression of the disease. Early studies have shown that social environment, particularly social relationships, can affect one's behavior and mental health. A study analyzing the correlation between loneliness and risk of developing AD revealed that lonely persons had higher risk of AD compared with persons who were not lonely. On the other hand, it has been reported that we can prevent cognitive decline and delay the onset of AD if we keep mentally active and frequently participate in social activities. In this review, we focus on the impact of social behaviors on the progression of cognitive deficit in animal models of AD with a particular emphasis on a mechanistic scheme that explains how social isolation exacerbates cognitive impairment and how social interaction with conspecifics rescues AD patients' memory deficit.

<separator>The involvement of endoplasmic reticulum formation and protein synthesis efficiency in VCP- and ATL1-related neurological disorders: Abstract The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the biggest organelle in cells and is involved in versatile cellular processes. Formation and maintenance of ER morphology are regulated by a series of proteins controlling membrane fusion and curvature. At least six different ER morphology regulators have been demonstrated to be involved in neurological disorders—including Valosin-containing protein (VCP), Atlastin-1 (ATL1), Spastin (SPAST), Reticulon 2 (RTN2), Receptor expression enhancing protein 1 (REEP1) and RAB10—suggesting a critical role of ER formation in neuronal activity and function. Among these genes, mutations in VCP gene involve in inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), autism spectrum disorders (ASD), and hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). ATL1 is also one of causative genes of HSP. RAB10 is associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). A recent study showed that VCP and ATL1 work together to regulate dendritic spine formation by controlling ER formation and consequent protein synthesis efficiency. RAB10 shares the same function with VCP and ATL1 to control ER formation and protein synthesis efficiency but acts independently. Increased protein synthesis by adding extra leucine to cultured neurons ameliorated dendritic spine deficits caused by VCP and ATL1 deficiencies, strengthening the significance of protein synthesis in VCP- and ATL1-regulated dendritic spine formation. These findings provide new insight into the roles of ER and protein synthesis in controlling dendritic spine formation and suggest a potential etiology of neurodegenerative disorders caused by mutations in VCP, ATL1 and other genes encoding proteins regulating ER formation and morphogenesis.

<separator>Differential regulations of fibronectin and laminin in Smad2 activation in vascular endothelial cells in response to disturbed flow: Abstract Background Atherosclerosis occurs in arterial curvatures and branches, where the flow is disturbed with low and oscillatory shear stress (OSS). The remodeling and alterations of extracellular matrices (ECMs) and their composition is the critical step in atherogenesis. In this study, we investigated the effects of different ECM proteins on the regulation of mechanotransduction in vascular endothelial cells (ECs) in response to OSS. Methods Through the experiments ranging from in vitro cell culture studies on effects of OSS on molecular signaling to in vivo examinations on clinical specimens from patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), we elucidated the roles of integrins and different ECMs, i.e., fibronectin (FN) and laminin (LM), in transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß receptor (TßR)-mediated Smad2 activation and nuclear factor-?B (NF-?B) signaling in ECs in response to OSS and hence atherogenesis. Results OSS at 0.5±12 dynes/cm2 induces sustained increases in the association of types I and II TßRs with ß1 and ß3 integrins in ECs grown on FN, but it only transient increases in ECs grown on LM. OSS induces a sustained activation of Smad2 in ECs on FN, but only a transient activation of Smad2 in ECs on LM. OSS-activation of Smad2 in ECs on FN regulates downstream NF-?B signaling and pro-inflammatory gene expression through the activation of ß1 integrin and its association with TßRs. In contrast, OSS induces transient activations of ß1 and ß3 integrins in ECs on LM, which associate with type I TßR to regulate Smad2 phosphorylation, resulting in transient induction of NF-?B and pro-inflammatory gene expression. In vivo investigations on diseased human coronary arteries from CAD patients revealed that Smad2 is highly activated in ECs of atherosclerotic lesions, which is accompanied by the concomitant increase of FN rather than LM in the EC layer and neointimal region of atherosclerotic lesions. Conclusions Our findings provide new insights into the mechanisms of how OSS regulates Smad2 signaling and pro-inflammatory genes through the complex signaling networks of integrins, TßRs, and ECMs, thus illustrating the molecular basis of regional pro-inflammatory activation within disturbed flow regions in the arterial tree.

<separator>Applied glycoproteomics—approaches to study genetic-environmental collisions causing protein-losing enteropathy Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), the loss of plasma proteins through the intestine, is a life-threatening symptom associated with seemingly unrelated conditions including Crohn's disease, congenital disorder of glycosylation, or Fontan surgery to correct univentricular hearts. Emerging commonalities between these and other disorders led us to hypothesize that PLE develops when genetic insufficiencies collide with simultaneous or sequential environmental insults. Most intriguing is the loss of heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans (HSPG) specifically from the basolateral surface of intestinal epithelial cells only during PLE episodes suggesting a direct link to protein leakage. Reasons for HSPG loss are unknown, but genetic insufficiencies affecting HSPG biosynthesis, trafficking, or degradation may be involved. Here, we describe cell-based assays we devised to identify key players contributing to protein leakage. Results from these assays confirm that HS loss directly causes protein leakage, but more importantly, it amplifies the effects of other factors, e.g., cytokines and increased pressure. Thus, HS loss appears to play a central role for PLE. To transfer our in vitro results back to the in vivo situation, we established methods to assess enteric protein leakage in mice and present several genetically deficient strains mimicking intestinal HS loss observed in PLE patients. Preliminary results indicate that mice with haploinsufficient genes involved in HS biosynthesis or HSPG trafficking develop intestinal protein leakage upon additional environmental stress. Our goal is to model PLE in vitro and in vivo to unravel the pathomechanisms underlying PLE, identify patients at risk, and provide them with a safe and effective therapy.

<separator>Bioinformatics for comprehensive finding and analysis of glycosyltransferases? Bioinformatics is a very powerful tool in the field of glycoproteomics as well as genomics and proteomics. As a part of the Glycogene Project (GG project), we have developed a novel bioinformatics system for the comprehensive identification and in silico cloning of human glycogenes. Using our system, a total of 105 candidate human glycogenes were identified and then engineered for heterologous expression. Of these candidates, 38 recombinant proteins were successfully identified for their enzyme activity and substrate specificity. We also classified 47 out of 60 carbohydrate-active enzyme glycosyltransferase families into 4 superfamilies using the profile Hidden Markov Model method. On the basis of our classification and the relationship between glycosylation pathways and superfamilies, we propose the evolution of glycosyltransferases.

<separator>Carbohydrates as future anti-adhesion drugs for infectious diseases Adhesion of pathogenic organisms to host tissues is the prerequisite for the initiation of the majority of infectious diseases. In many systems, it is mediated by lectins present on the surface of the infectious organism that bind to complementary carbohydrates on the surface of the host tissues. Lectin-deficient mutants often lack the ability to initiate infection. The bacterial lectins are typically in the form of elongated submicroscopic multi-subunit protein appendages, known as fimbriae (or pili). The best characterized of these are the mannose-specific type 1 fimbriae, the galabiose-specific P fimbriae and the N-acetylglucosamine-specific fimbriae of Escherichia coli. Soluble carbohydrates recognized by the bacterial surface lectins block the adhesion of the bacteria to animal cells in vitro. Aromatic a-mannosides are potent inhibitors of type 1 fimbriated E. coli, being up to 1000 times more active than MeaMan, with affinities in the nanomolar range. This is due to the presence of a hydrophobic region next to the monosaccharide-binding site of the fimbriae, as recently demonstrated by X-ray studies. Polyvalent saccharides (e.g., neoglycoproteins or dendrimers) are also powerful inhibitors of bacterial adhesion in vitro. Very significantly, lectin-inhibitory saccharides have been shown to protect mice, rabbits, calves and monkeys against experimental infection by lectin-carrying bacteria. Since anti-adhesive agents do not act by killing or arresting the growth of the pathogens, it is very likely that strains resistant to such agents will emerge at a markedly lower rate than of strains that are resistant to antibiotics. Suitable sugars also inhibit the binding to cells of carbohydrate-specific toxins, among them those of Shigella dysenteriae Type 1, and of the homologous Verotoxins of E. coli, specific for galabiose. Appropriately designed polyvalent ligands are up to six orders of magnitude stronger inhibitors of toxin binding in vitro than the monovalent ones, and they protect mice against the Shigella toxin. The above data provide clear proof for the feasibility of anti-adhesion therapy of infectious diseases, although this has not yet been successful in humans. All in all, however, there is little doubt that inhibitors of microbial lectins will in the near future join the arsenal of drugs for therapy of infectious diseases.

<separator>Demonstration of the expression and the enzymatic activity of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase IX in the mouse brain We recently reported on a brain-specific ß1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase IX (GnT-IX, also referred to as GnT-VB), a GnT-V homologue, which acts on a-linked mannose of N-glycans and O-mannosyl glycans. To distinguish functions of GnT-IX with GnT-V, we examined the distribution of GnT-IX and GnT-V transcripts in mouse tissues by Northern blot analysis. The two enzymes were differentially expressed as has previously been observed in human tissues. GnT-IX transcripts were restricted to the cerebrum, cerebellum, thymus and testis, whereas GnT-V transcripts were expressed ubiquitously in mouse tissues. To investigate the localization of these enzymes in mouse tissues in more detail, a polyclonal antibody against GnT-IX was prepared. The antibody specifically recognized GnT-IX, but not GnT-V, in the Golgi apparatus, as confirmed by the use of GnT-IX and GnT-V transfectants. In agreement with the Northern blot analysis data, an immunohistochemical study showed substantial expression of GnT-IX in the brain, while no expression was observed in the liver. Moreover, to exclude GnT-V contamination, we performed an enzymatic assay for GnT-IX using a Mgat5 (GnT-V)-null mouse brain as an enzyme source and found the enzymatic activities do, in fact, exist in mouse brain. The reaction product was confirmed by high performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. These results demonstrate, for the first time, that GnT-IX protein is actually expressed and may function as a glycosyltransferase in the brain.

<separator>Design of carbohydrate multiarrays Recently, microarray technology has increasingly been widely applied in glycobiology. This technology has rather evident potential advantages: unlimited number of carbohydrate ligands coated onto one small sized chip, enormously low consumption of both carbohydrate ligands and carbohydrate-binding proteins to be tested, etc. Literature data demonstrate that three approaches are used for glycoarray design. The first one is based on the physical adsorption of glycomolecules on a surface (as in a common ELISA), the second one—on covalent immobilization, and the third one—on a streptavidin–biotin system. In all of the described methods, carbohydrate ligands were placed on chips as a 2D monolayer and high sensitivity was achieved due to fluorescent detection. Notably, a tendency of stepping from model chips toward real multiarrays, where the number of carbohydrate ligands can be up to two hundred, has been observed the last 2 years, this already producing a number of interesting findings when studying carbohydrate-binding proteins. In 2005 new construction, 3D glycochip was described, where 150 µm diameter polyacrylamide gel elements serve as microreactors instead of 2D dots. As a result of the 3D placement of a ligand, two orders of magnitude increase of its density is possible, this providing principal signal improvement during fluorescent detection and increasing method sensitivity. At the same time, carbohydrate consumption is low, i.e., ~1 pmol per gel element. Copolymerization chemistry enables the immobilization of several glycomolecule classes to the gel, in particular, aminospacered oligosaccharides, polyacrylamide conjugates, and even 2-aminopyridine derivatives of oligosaccharides, which are widely used in the structural analysis of glycoprotein N-chains.

<separator>Differential glycosylation of polyclonal IgG, IgG-Fc and IgG-Fab isolated from the sera of patients with ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins produced in vivo may be tissue, developmentally and/or disease specific. PTMs impact on the stability and function of proteins and offer a challenge to the commercial production of protein biotherapeutics. We have previously reported a marked deficit in galactosylation of oligosaccharides released from polyclonal IgG isolated from sera of patients with the anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) associated vasculitides; Wegener's granulomatosis (WG) and microscopic polyangiitis (MPA). Whilst normal polyclonal IgG molecules are glycosylated within the IgG-Fc region, ~20% of molecules also bear oligosaccharides attached to the variable regions of the light or heavy chain IgG-Fab. It is of interest, therefore to compare profiles of oligosaccharides released from the IgG-Fc and IgG-Fab of normal IgG with that isolated from the sera of patients with WG or MPA. This study shows that whilst the oligosaccharides released from ANCA IgG-Fc are hypogalactosylated those released from IgG-Fab are galactosylated and sialylated. These results show that hypogalactosylation of IgG-Fc is not due to a defect in the glycosylation or processing machinery. It rather suggests a subtle change in IgG-Fc conformation that influences the addition of galactose. Remarkably, this influence is exerted on all plasma cells. Interestingly, a licensed monoclonal antibody therapeutic, produced in Sp2/0 cells, is also shown to be hypogalactosylated in its IgG-Fc but fully galactosylated in its IgG-Fab.

<separator>Galectin-3: An open-ended story Galectins, an ancient lectin family, are characterized by specific binding of ß-galactosides through evolutionary conserved sequence elements of carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD). A structurally unique member of the family is galectin-3; in addition to the CRD it contains a proline- and glycine-rich N-terminal domain (ND) through which is able to form oligomers. Galectin-3 is widely spread among different types of cells and tissues, found intracellularly in nucleus and cytoplasm or secreted via non-classical pathway outside of cell, thus being found on the cell surface or in the extracellular space. Through specific interactions with a variety of intra- and extracellular proteins galectin-3 affects numerous biological processes and seems to be involved in different physiological and pathophysiological conditions, such as development, immune reactions, and neoplastic transformation and metastasis. The review attempts to summarize the existing information on structural, biochemical and intriguing functional properties of galectin-3.

<separator>Galectin-3 in macrophage-like cells exposed to immunomodulatory drugs During the last few decades, the effects of immunomodulatory drugs on numerous molecules and biological processes have been widely studied. Nevertheless, the relationship between immunomodulatory drugs and lectin expression/function is still to be elucidated. In this study, we used THP-1-derived macrophages to investigate the effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin and indomethacin) and glucocorticoids (hydrocortisone and dexamethasone) on galectin-3, a multifunctional ß-galactoside binding lectin, which in general acts as a strong pro-inflammatory signal. The results showed that all immunomodulatory drugs applied in clinically relevant doses affect both the gene (LGALS3) and protein expression level of galectin-3. The provoked changes on protein level are qualitatively and quantitatively different comparing to the effects on galectin-3 mRNA level, and depend on the differentiation state of the cell, drug type and applied concentration as well as on time of the exposure. Our data revealed galectin-3 as a new target molecule of immunomodulatory drugs, thus suggesting an additional pathway of their action on immune response.

<separator>Glycoform-dependent conformational alteration of the Fc region of human immunoglobulin G1 as revealed by NMR spectroscopy The Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (IgG) expresses the biantennary complex type oligosaccharides at Asn297 of the CH2 domain of each heavy chain with microheterogeneities depending on physiological and pathological states. These N-glycans are known to be essential for promotion of proper effector functions of IgG such as complement activation and Fc? receptor (Fc?R)-mediated activities. To gain a better understanding of the role of Fc glycosylation, we prepared a series of truncated glycoforms of human IgG1-Fc and analyzed their interactions with human soluble Fc?RIIIa (sFc?RIIIa) and with staphylococcal protein A by surface plasmon resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods. Progressive but less pronounced reductions in the affinity for sFc?RIIIa were observed as a result of the galactosidase and subsequent N-acetylhexosaminidase treatments of IgG1-Fc. The following endoglycosidase D treatment, giving rise to a disaccharide structure composed of a fucosylated GlcNAc, abrogated the affinity of IgG1-Fc for sFc?RIIIa. On the other hand, those glycosidase treatments did not significantly affect the affinity of IgG1-Fc for protein A. Inspection of stable-isotope-assisted NMR data of a series of Fc glycoforms indicates that the stepwise trimming out of the carbohydrate residues results in concomitant increase in the number of amino acid residues perturbed thereby in the CH2 domains. Furthermore, the cleavage at the GlcNAcß1-4GlcNAc glycosidic linkage induced the conformational alterations of part of the lower hinge region, which makes no direct contact with the carbohydrate moieties and forms the major Fc?R-binding site, while the conformation of the CH2/CH3 interface was barely perturbed that is the protein A-binding site. These results indicate that the carbohydrate moieties are required for maintaining the structural integrity of the Fc?R-binding site.

<separator>Glycomics investigation into insulin action Defects in glycosylation are becoming increasingly associated with a range of human diseases. In some cases, the disease is caused by the glycosylation defect, whereas in others, the aberrant glycosylation may be a consequence of the disease. The implementation of highly sensitive and rapid mass spectrometric screening strategies for profiling the glycans present in model biological systems is revealing valuable insights into disease phenotypes. In addition, glycan screening is proving useful in the analysis of knock-out mice where it is possible to assess the role of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases and what function they have at the cellular and whole organism level. In this study, we analysed the effect of insulin on the glycosylation of 3T3-L1 cells and the effect of insulin resistance on glycosylation in a mouse model. Transcription profiling of 3T3-L1 cells treated with and without insulin revealed expression changes of several glycogenes. In contrast, mass spectrometric screening analysis of the glycans from these cells revealed very similar profiles suggesting that any changes in glycosylation were most likely on specific proteins rather than a global phenomenon. A fat-fed versus carbohydrate-fed mouse insulin resistant model was analysed to test the consequences of chronic insulin resistance. Muscle and liver N-glycosylation profiles from these mice are reported.

<separator>Glyconanoparticles: Types, synthesis and applications in glycoscience, biomedicine and material science Nanoparticles are the subject of numerous papers and reports and are full of promises for electronic, optical, magnetic and biomedical applications. Although metallic nanoparticles have been functionalized with peptides, proteins and DNA during the last 20 years, carbohydrates have not been used with this purpose until 2001. Since the first synthesis of gold nanoparticles functionalized with carbohydrates (glyconanoparticles) was reported, the number of published articles has considerably increased. This article reviews progress in the development of nanoparticles functionalized with biological relevant oligosaccharides. The glyconanoparticles constitute a good bio-mimetic model of carbohydrate presentation at the cell surface, and maybe, excellent tools for Glycobiology, Biomedicine and Material Science investigations.

<separator>Quantitation of Leishmania lipophosphoglycan repeat units by capillary electrophoresis The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored lipophosphoglycan (LPG) of Leishmania is the dominant cell surface glycoconjugate of these pathogenic parasites. LPG is structurally characterized by a series of phosphoglycan repeat units. Determining the number of repeat units per LPG molecule has proven difficult using current technologies, such as mass spectrometry. As an alternative method to quantitate the number of repeat units in LPG, a procedure based on capillary electrophoretic analysis of the proportion of mannose to 2,5-anhydromannose (derived from the nonacetylated glucosamine of the GPI anchor of LPG) was developed. The CE-based technique is sensitive and relatively rapid compared to GC-MS-based protocols. Its application was demonstrated in quantitating the number of LPG repeat units from several species of Leishmania as well as from two life-cycle stages of these organisms.

<separator>Shedding and uptake of gangliosides and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins Gangliosides and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins have very different biosynthetic origin, but they have one thing in common: they are both comprised of a relatively large hydrophilic moiety tethered to a membrane by a relatively small lipid tail. Both gangliosides and GPI-anchored proteins can be actively shed from the membrane of one cell and taken up by other cells by insertion of their lipid anchors into the cell membrane. The process of shedding and uptake of gangliosides and GPI-anchored proteins has been independently discovered in several disciplines during the last few decades, but these discoveries were largely ignored by people working in other areas of science. By bringing together results from these, sometimes very distant disciplines, in this review, we give an overview of current knowledge about shedding and uptake of gangliosides and GPI-anchored proteins. Tumor cells and some pathogens apparently misuse this process for their own advantage, but its real physiological functions remain to be discovered.

<separator>Structural analysis of the glycoprotein allergen Hev b 4 from natural rubber latex by mass spectrometry The lecithinase homolog (Hev b 4) from Hevea brasiliensis (Q6T4P0_HEVBR) is an important natural rubber latex allergen. Hev b 4 is a highly glycosylated protein and its carbohydrate moiety has been implicated in the binding of IgE from natural rubber latex allergic patients. The cDNA for Hev b 4 has recently been cloned and sequenced. Here, we have analyzed the post-translational modifications of natural Hev b 4 by liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry of tryptic peptides. Seven of the eight potential glycosylation sites were found to be occupied. One site, however, was only partially glycosylated. Asn224 was substituted by complex type N-glycans with fucose and xylose, whereas all other sites carried either oligomannose glycans or a mixture of oligomannose and complex N-glycans. Glycosylation site Asn308, the most C-terminal one of the eight sites, was only found in the non-glycosylated form. The complex type N-glycans apparently form the molecular basis for the immune reaction with patients' sera. A large fraction of Hev b 4 molecules contains two or more complex N-glycans and thus a physiological reaction against these polyvalent allergens on the basis of the carbohydrate is in theory possible. Aside from allowing glycosylation analysis, the mass spectrometric data defined the N-terminal cleavage site of Hev b 4. This study once more demonstrates the outstanding analytical potential of electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry coupled with liquid chromatographic separation.

<separator>The role of informatics in glycobiology research with special emphasis on automatic interpretation of MS spectra This paper reviews the current status of bioinformatics applications and databases in glycobiology, which are based on bioinformatics approaches as well as informatics for glycobiology where an explicit encoding of glycan structures is required. The availability of the complete sequence of the human genome has accelerated the systematic identification of so far unidentified glycogenes considerably in many areas of glycobiology using well-established bioinfomatics tools. Although there has been an immense development of new glyco-related data collections as well as informatics tools and several efforts have been started to cross-link and reference the various data deposited in distributed databases, informatics for glycobiology and glycomics is still poorly developed compared to the genomics and proteomics area. The development of algorithms for the automatic interpretation of MS spectra – currently, a severe bottleneck, which hampers the rapid and reliable interpretation of MS data in high-throughput glycomics projects – is reviewed. A comprehensive list of web resources is given. Several lines of progression are discussed. There is an urgent need for the development of decentralised input facilities of experimentally determined glycan structures. Simultaneously, agreements of standards for the structural description of glycans as well as formats for the related data have to be established. The integration of glycomics with genomics/proteomics has to increase.

<separator>The role of O-linked and N-linked oligosaccharides on the structure–function of glycoprotein hormones: Development of agonists and antagonists Thyrotropin (TSH) and the gonadotropins; follitropin (FSH), lutropin (LH) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) are a family of heterodimeric glycoprotein hormones. These hormones composed of two noncovalently linked subunits; a common a and a hormone specific ß subunits. Assembly of the subunits is vital to the function of these hormones. However, genetic fusion of the a and ß subunits of hFSH, hCG and hTSH resulted in active polypeptides. The glycoprotein hormone subunits contain one (TSH and LH) or two (a, FSHß and hCGß) asparagine-linked (N-linked) oligosaccharides. CGß subunit is distinguished among the ß subunits because of the presence of a carboxyl-terminal peptide (CTP) bearing four O-linked oligosaccharide chains. To examine the role of the oligosaccharide chains on the structure–function of glycoprotein hormones, chemical, enzymatic and site-directed mutagenesis were used. The results indicated that O-linked oligosaccharides play a minor role in receptor binding and signal transduction of the glycoprotein hormones. In contrast, the O-linked oligosaccharides are critical for in vivo half-life and bioactivity. Ligation of the CTP bearing four O-linked oligosaccharide sites to different proteins, resulted in enhancing the in vivo bioactivity and half-life of the proteins. The N-linked oligosaccharide chains have a minor role in receptor binding of glycoprotein hormones, but they are critical for bioactivity. Moreover, glycoprotein hormones lacking N-linked oligosaccharides behave as antagonists. In conclusion, the O-linked oligosaccharides are not important for in vitro bioactivity or receptor binding, but they play an important role in the in vivo bioactivity and half-life of the glycoprotein hormones. Addition of the O-linked oligosaccharide chains to the backbone of glycoprotein hormones could be an interesting strategy for designing long acting agonists of glycoprotein hormones. On the other hand, the N-linked oligosaccharides are not important for receptor binding, but they are critical for bioactivity of glycoprotein hormones. Deletion of the N-linked oligosaccharides resulted in the development of glycoprotein hormone antagonists. In the case of hTSH, development of an antagonist may offer a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment of thyrotoxicosis caused by Graves' disease and TSH secreting pituitary adenoma.

<separator>Tracing the history of Gala1–4Gal on glycoproteins in modern birds Gala1–4Gal is typically found in mammalian glycolipids in small quantities, and recognized by some pathogens, such as uropathogenic Escherichia coli. In contrast, glycoproteins containing Gala1–4Gal were rarely found in vertebrates except in a few species of birds and amphibians until recently. However, we had previously reported that pigeon (Columba livia) egg white and serum glycoproteins are rich in N-glycans with Gala1–4Gal at non-reducing termini. Our investigation with egg white glycoproteins from 181 avian species also revealed that the distribution of (Gala1–4Gal)-containing glycoproteins was not rare among avians, and is correlated with the phylogeny of birds. The differentiated expression was most likely emerged at earlier stage of diversification of modern birds, but some birds might have lost the facility for the expression relatively recently.


<separator>ANALYSIS OF DUPLICATION AND TIMING OF HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENTS ON MEDICAL DEVICES IN EUROPE Objectives: Strengthening efforts toward better collaboration plays a pivotal role in the assessment of medical devices to reduce overlap and save resources. This study explored the level of duplication in health technology assessments (HTA) of medical devices in Europe and their respective timing in order to identify areas for better collaboration. Methods: An analysis of European HTA reports of medical devices regarding overlaps in topics and timing in relation to market authorization was performed. We conducted a systematic search in the ADVANCE, Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, Syngerus, and POP databases, complemented by hand searching, to identify HTA reports published between 01/2003 and 07/2016 for a preselected cohort group of ten technologies. We analyzed the number of annual assessments per technology and evaluated activity patterns and timing in undertaking the HTA of the different institutes in Europe. Results: The results revealed the amount of duplication in the European HTA production: the number of reports per technology ranged from minimum seven to maximum twenty-two over a time-span of 13.5 years. HTA institutes perform assessments at a similar time range within 5 to 10 years following market authorization. The timing of the initial assessment in relation to the granting of the CE-mark varies according to the particular technology. Conclusion: The findings suggest that efficient collaboration may help to save scarce resources and time of HTA institutes in Europe. Efficient collaboration as such needs to shift the focus beyond the time span of 1 year, and build on each's others work from previous assessments.
"

<separator>CHARACTERISTICS OF MANAGED ENTRY AGREEMENTS IN AUSTRALIA Objectives: Australia relies on managed entry agreements (MEAs) for many medicines added to the national Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). Previous studies of Australian MEAs examined public domain documents and were not able to provide a comprehensive assessment of the types and operation of MEAs. This study used government documents approved for release to examine the implementation and administration of MEAs implemented January 2012 to May 2016. Methods: We accessed documents for medicines with MEAs on the PBS between January 2012 and May 2016. Data were extracted on Anatomical Therapeutic Classification (ATC), type of MEA (financial, financial with outcomes, outcomes, and subcategories within each group), implementation and administration methods, source of MEA recommendation, and type of economic analysis. Results: Of all medication indication pairs (MIPs) recommended for listing, one-third had MEAs implemented. Our study of eighty-seven MIPs had 170 MEAs in place. The Government's expert health technology assessment (HTA) committee recommended MEAs for 90 percent of the eighty-seven MIPs. A total of 81 percent of MEAs were simple financial agreements: the majority either discounts (32 percent) or reimbursement caps (43 percent). Outcome-based MEAs were least common (5 percent). Ninety-two percent of MEAs were implemented and operated through legal agreements. Approximately half of the MIPs were listed on the basis of accepted claims of cost-minimization. Forty-nine percent of medicines were in ATC L group. Conclusion: Advice from HTA evaluations strongly influences the implementation of ways to manage uncertainties while providing access to medicines. The government relied primarily on simple financial agreements for the managed entry of medicines for which there were perceived risks.
COST ANALYSIS OF PERIPHERALLY INSERTED CENTRAL CATHETER IN PEDIATRIC PATIENTS Purpose: A peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) is a useful option in providing secure venous access, which enables patients to be discharged earlier with the provision of home care. The objective was to identify the costs associated with having a PICC from a societal perspective, and to identify factors that are associated with total PICC costs. Methods: Data were obtained from a retrospective cohort of 469 hospitalized pediatric patients with PICCs inserted. Both direct and indirect costs were estimated from a societal perspective. Insertion costs, complication costs, nurse and physician assessment costs, inpatient ward costs, catheter removal costs, home care costs, travel costs, and the cost associated with productivity losses incurred by parents were included in this study. Results: Based on catheter dwell time, the median total cost associated with a PICC per patient per day (including inpatient hospital costs) was $3,133.5 ($2,210.7–$9,627.0) in 2017 Canadian dollars ($1.00USD = $1.25CAD in 2017). The adjusted mean cost per patient per day was $2,648.2 ($2,402.4–$2,920.4). Excluding inpatient ward costs, the median total and adjusted costs per patient per day were $198.8 ($91.8–$2,475.8) and $362.7($341.0–$386.0), respectively. Younger age, occurrence of complications, more catheter dwell days, wards with more intensive care, and the absence of home care were significant factors associated with higher total PICC costs.  Conclusions: This study has demonstrated the costs associated with PICCs. This information may be helpful for healthcare providers to understand PICC related cost in children and resource implications.


<separator>EFFECTS OF INTERPERSONAL TRUST AMONG USERS OF ONLINE HEALTH COMMUNITIES ON PATIENT TRUST IN AND SATISFACTION WITH THEIR PHYSICIAN Objectives: Online Health Communities (OHCs) are increasingly being used by patients in the Web 2.0 era. Today's patients have instant access to a great deal of medical information and contacts. Despite the considerable development of OHCs, little is known regarding the impact on the patient–physician relationship. This research aims at filling this gap and examines how interpersonal trust on peer-to-peer OHCs influences two key relational variables, namely patient trust in the physician and patient satisfaction with the physician. It also investigates their influences on the patient's attitude toward the physician. Methods: Drawing on both the relational and medical literatures, we propose a research model that brings out the relationships between interpersonal trust in OHCs, and patients' trust, satisfaction and attitude toward the physician. We then conduct a quantitative survey of 512 OHC users in France, using structural equation modeling to test our hypotheses. Results: Our findings indicate that interpersonal trust in OHCs exerts a positive influence on both patients' trust in and satisfaction with their physician. It also highlights that these two relational variables have a positive influence on patient attitude toward the physician. Our findings also indicate that patient trust influences patient satisfaction with the physician. Conclusions: This research highlights the importance of OHCs, which can be seen as valuable instruments for enhancing patient–physician relationships. It shows that healthcare managers should seek to enhance interpersonal trust among OHC users, because this trust has a positive influence on patient satisfaction with, trust in and attitude toward the physician.
"

<separator>HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT EVIDENCE ON E-HEALTH/M-HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES: EVALUATING THE TRANSPARENCY AND THOROUGHNESS Objectives: Evaluation is crucial for integration of e-Health/m-Health into healthcare systems and health technology assessment (HTA) could offer sound methodological basis for these evaluations. Aim of this study was to look for HTA reports on e-Health/m-Health technologies and to analyze their transparency, consistency and thoroughness, with the goal to detect areas that need improvement. Methods: PubMed, ISI-WOS, and University of York – Centre for Reviews and Dissemination–electronic databases were searched to identify reports on e-Health/m-Health technologies, published up until April 1, 2016. The International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA) checklist was used to evaluate transparency and consistency of included reports. Thoroughness was assessed by checking the presence of domains suggested by the European network for Health Technology Assessment (EUnetHTA) HTA Core Model. Results: Twenty-eight reports published between 1999 and 2015 were included. Most were delivered by non-European countries (71.4 percent) and only 35.7 percent were classified as full reports. All the HTA reports defined the scope of research whereas more than 80 percent provided author details, summary, discussed findings, and conclusion. On the contrary, policy and research questions were clearly defined in around 30 percent and 50 percent of reports. With respect to the EUnetHTA Core Model, around 70 percent of reports dealt with effectiveness and economic evaluation, more than 50 percent described health problem and approximately 40 percent organizational and social aspects. Conclusions: E-Health/m-Health technologies are increasingly present in the field of HTA. Yet, our review identified several missing elements. Most of the reports failed to respond to relevant assessment components, especially ethical, social and organizational implications.
"

<separator>IMPORTANCE OF CONTEXTUAL DATA IN PRODUCING HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT RECOMMENDATIONS: A CASE STUDY Objectives: Contextual data and local expertise are important sources of data that cannot be ignored in hospital-based health technology assessment (HTA) processes. Despite a lack of or unconvincing evidence in the scientific literature, technology can be recommended in a given context. We illustrate this using a case study regarding biplane angiography for vascular neurointervention. Methods: A systematic literature review was conducted, along with an analysis of the context in our setting. The outcomes of interest were radiation doses, clinical complications, procedure times, purchase cost, impact on teaching program, the confidence of clinicians in the technology, quality of care, accessibility, and the volume of activity. A committee comprising managers, clinical experts, physicians, physicists and HTA experts was created to produce a recommendation regarding biplane technology acquisition to replace a monoplane device. Results: The systematic literature review yielded nine eligible articles for analysis. Despite a very low level of evidence in the literature, the biplane system appears to reduce ionizing radiation and medical complications, as well as shorten procedure time. Contextual data indicated that the biplane system could improve operator confidence, which could translate into reduced risk, particularly for complex procedures. In addition, the biplane system can support our institution in its advanced procedures teaching program. Conclusions: Given the advantages provided by the biplane technology in our setting, the committee has recommended its acquisition. Contextual data were of utmost importance in this recommendation. Moreover, this technology should be implemented alongside a responsibility to collect outcome data to optimize clinical protocol in the doses of ionizing delivered.
INTEGRATED CARE PATHWAYS IN LUNG CANCER: A QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT Background: Non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) diagnosis and treatment is a highly complex process, requiring managerial skills merged with clinical knowledge and experience. Integrated care pathways (ICPs) might be a good strategy to overview and improve patient's management. The aim of this study was to review the ICPs of NSCLC patients in a University Hospital and to identify areas of quality improvement. Materials and Methods: The electronic medical records of 169 NSCLC patients visited at the University Hospital were retrospectively reviewed. Quality of care (QoC) has been measured trough fifteen indicators, selected according main international Guidelines and approved by the multi-disciplinary team for thoracic malignancies. Results have been compared with those of a similar retrospective study conducted at the same hospital in 2008. Results: A total of 146 patients were considered eligible. Eight of fifteen indicators were not in line with the benchmarks. We compared the results obtained in the two separate periods. Moreover, we process some proposal to be discussed with the general management of the hospital, aimed to redesign NSCLC care pathways. Conclusions: ICPs confirm to be feasible and to be an effective tool in real life. The periodic measurement of QoC indicators is necessary to ensure clinical governance of patients pathways.
"

<separator>NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE SUSTAINABILITY OF HEALTH KNOWLEDGE TRANSLATION INITIATIVES IN UGANDA Objectives: The aim of this study was to provide evidence about the design and implementation of policies for advancing the sustainability of knowledge translation (KT) initiatives and policies in Uganda's health system. Methods: We searched for and reviewed evidence about KT sustainability issues in Uganda, the impacts of options, barriers to implementing these options, and implementation strategies to address such barriers. In instances where the systematic reviews provided limited evidence, these were supplemented with relevant primary studies. Documents such as the government reports and unpublished literature were also included in the search. Key informant interviews and a policy dialogue were conducted, and an expert working group guided the study. Results: The KT sustainability issues identified were: the absence of a specific unit within the health sector to coordinate and synthesize research; health worker not familiar with KT activities and not often used. Furthermore, Uganda lacks a mechanism to sustain its current national health frameworks or platforms, and does not have a system to ensure the sustained coordination of existing national health KT platforms. The policy options proposed include: (i) the identification of a KT champion; (ii) the establishment of an operational KT framework; (iii) KT capacity building for researchers and research users, as well as policy and decision makers. Conclusions: The sustainability of KT will be influenced by the prevailing context and concerns within healthcare both in Uganda and internationally. Furthermore, the availability of resources for KT advocacy, communication, and program design will impact on the sustainability of Uganda's KT activities.


<separator>OPTIMIZING USABILITY OF AN ECONOMIC DECISION SUPPORT TOOL: PROTOTYPE OF THE EQUIPT TOOL Objectives: Economic decision-support tools can provide valuable information for tobacco control stakeholders, but their usability may impact the adoption of such tools. This study aims to illustrate a mixed-method usability evaluation of an economic decision-support tool for tobacco control, using the EQUIPT ROI tool prototype as a case study. Methods: A cross-sectional mixed methods design was used, including a heuristic evaluation, a thinking aloud approach, and a questionnaire testing and exploring the usability of the Return of Investment tool. Results: A total of sixty-six users evaluated the tool (thinking aloud) and completed the questionnaire. For the heuristic evaluation, four experts evaluated the interface. In total twenty-one percent of the respondents perceived good usability. A total of 118 usability problems were identified, from which twenty-six problems were categorized as most severe, indicating high priority to fix them before implementation. Conclusions: Combining user-based and expert-based evaluation methods is recommended as these were shown to identify unique usability problems. The evaluation provides input to optimize usability of a decision-support tool, and may serve as a vantage point for other developers to conduct usability evaluations to refine similar tools before wide-scale implementation. Such studies could reduce implementation gaps by optimizing usability, enhancing in turn the research impact of such interventions.


<separator>PATIENT AND PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT IN EARLY AWARENESS AND ALERT ACTIVITIES: AN EXAMPLE FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM Objectives: The aim of this study is to report on the experiences, benefits, and challenges of patient and public involvement and engagement (PPIE) from a publicly funded early awareness and alert (EAA) system in the United Kingdom. Methods: Using email, telephone, a Web site portal, Twitter and focus groups, patients and the public were involved and engaged in the recognized stages of an EAA system: identification, filtration, prioritization, early assessment, and dissemination. Results: Approaches for PPIE were successfully integrated into all aspects of the National Institute for Health Research Horizon Scanning Research and Intelligence Centre's EAA system. Input into identification activities was not as beneficial as involvement in prioritization and early assessment. Patients gave useful insight into the Centre's Web site and engaging patients using Twitter has enabled the Centre to disseminate outputs to a wider audience. Conclusions: EAA systems should consider involving and engaging with patients and the public in identification, prioritization, and assessment of emerging health technologies where practicable. Further research is required to examine the value and impact of PPIE in EAA activities and in the early development of health technologies.


"PATIENT-CENTERED DECISION MAKING: LESSONS FROM MULTI-CRITERIA DECISION ANALYSIS FOR QUANTIFYING PATIENT PREFERENCES Objectives: Patient preferences should be a central consideration in healthcare decision making. However, stories of patients challenging regulatory and reimbursement decisions has led to questions on whether patient voices are being considered sufficiently during those decision making processes. This has led some to argue that it is necessary to quantify patient preferences before they can be adequately considered. Methods: This study considers the lessons from the use of multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) for efforts to quantify patient preferences. It defines MCDA and summarizes the benefits it can provide to decision makers, identifies examples of MCDAs that have involved patients, and summarizes good practice guidelines as they relate to quantifying patient preferences. Results: The guidance developed to support the use of MCDA in healthcare provide some useful considerations for the quantification of patient preferences, namely that researchers should give appropriate consideration to: the heterogeneity of patient preferences, and its relevance to decision makers; the cognitive challenges posed by different elicitation methods; and validity of the results they produce. Furthermore, it is important to consider how the relevance of these considerations varies with the decision being supported. Conclusions: The MCDA literature holds important lessons for how patient preferences should be quantified to support healthcare decision making.


<separator>PEER-REVIEWED JOURNAL EDITORS' VIEWS ON REAL-WORLD EVIDENCE Objectives: Peer-review publication is a critical step to the translation and dissemination of research results into clinical practice guidelines, health technology assessment (HTA) and payment policies, and clinical care. The objective of this study was to examine current views of journal editors regarding: (i) The value of real-world evidence (RWE) and how it compares with other types of studies; (ii) Education and/or resources journal editors provide to their peer reviewers or perceive as needed for authors, reviewers, and editors related to RWE. Methods: Journal editors' views on the value of RWE and editorial procedures for RWE manuscripts were obtained through telephone interviews, a survey, and in-person, roundtable discussion. Results: In total, seventy-nine journals were approached, resulting in fifteen telephone interviews, seventeen survey responses and eight roundtable participants. RWE was considered valuable by all interviewed editors (n = 15). Characteristics of high-quality RWE manuscripts included: novelty/relevance, rigorous methodology, and alignment of data to research question. Editors experience challenges finding peer reviewers; however, these challenges persist across all study designs. Journals generally do not provide guidance, assistance, or training for reviewers, including for RWE studies. Health policy/health services research (HSR) editors were more likely than specialty or general medicine editors to participate in this study, potentially indicating that HSR researchers are more comfortable/interested in RWE. Conclusions: Editors report favorable views of RWE studies provided studies examine important questions and are methodologically rigorous. Improving peer-review processes across all study designs, has the potential to improve the evidence base for decision making, including HTA.


<separator>STAKEHOLDERS' PERCEPTIONS OF HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT IN TURKEY Background: In April of 2014, the Turkish Ministry of Health held the First Annual Health Technology Assessment (HTA) Meeting in Antalya. Objectives: The objectives were to understand the perceptions of stakeholders regarding the current status of HTA and document their recommendations and strategies for promoting systematic use of HTA in Turkey. Methods: The study was conducted using a qualitative written survey assessing current compliance with the fifteen HTA principles suggested by Drummond et al. (Key principles for the improved conduct of health technology assessments for resource allocation decision. Int J Technol Assess Health Care. 2008;24:244–258) and a qualitative method referred to as the Collective Intelligence Platform®. Results: A total of 216 stakeholders representing academic, public, and the private health sector attended the annual meeting; 178 completed the survey and 183 participated in the Platform. Quantitative Results: Survey participants reported that, although Turkey does not currently fully comply with any of the fifteen HTA principles, there is some compliance with all of them. The overall average score for all fifteen principles was 3.04. Quantitivate Results: Participants recommended a more transparent, independent, and evidence-based policy decision-making system through better coordination of HTA activities, data aggregation, capacity development, and a national HTA core model and framework. Conclusions: Platform participants described the current HTA environment as disjointed and lacking in resources and support from policy-making leaders. Despite the persisting challenges, awareness of the strengths and weaknesses of the current system combined with increasing interaction among Turkish stakeholders and the international HTA community can meaningfully contribute to the continued development and promotion of HTA in Turkey.
A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF GROUP WALKING IN PHYSICALLY HEALTHY PEOPLE TO PROMOTE PHYSICAL ACTIVITY Background: Walking is a good way to meet physical activity guidelines. We examined the effectiveness of walking in groups compared with walking alone or inactive controls in physically healthy adults on physical activity and quality of life. (PROSPERO CRD42016033752). Methods: We searched Medline, Embase, Cinahl, Web of Knowledge Science Citation Index, and Cochrane CENTRAL until March 2016, for any comparative studies, in physically healthy adults, of walking in groups compared with inactive controls or walking alone, reporting any measure of physical activity. We searched references from recent relevant systematic reviews. Two reviewers checked study eligibility and independently extracted data. Disagreements were resolved through discussion. Quality was assessed using likelihood of selection, performance, attrition, and detection biases. Meta-analysis was conducted using Review Manager 5.3. Results: From 1,404 citations, 18 studies were included in qualitative synthesis and 10 in meta-analyses. Fourteen compared group walking to inactive controls and four to walking alone. Eight reported more than one measure of physical activity, none reported according to current guidelines. Group walking compared with inactive controls increased follow-up physical activity (9 randomized controlled trials, standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.58 [95 percent confidence interval {CI}, 0.34–0.82] to SMD 0.43 [95 percent CI, 0.20–0.66]). Compared with walking alone, studies were too few and too heterogeneous to conduct meta-analysis, but the trend was improved physical activity at follow-up for group walking participants. Seven (all inactive control) reported quality-of-life: five showed statistically significantly improved scores. Discussion: Better evidence may encourage government policy to promote walking in groups. Standardized physical activity outcomes need to be reported in research.
"

<separator>SYSTEMATIC REVIEW WITH NETWORK META-ANALYSIS OF RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIALS OF ROTATOR CUFF TEAR TREATMENT Objectives: Rotator cuff tear is the leading cause of the decline in quality of life for older adults, but comparative evidence on treatment effectiveness is lacking. This study systematically reviewed the effects of various rotator cuff tear treatments through a Bayesian meta-analysis of the related randomized clinical trials (RCTs). Methods: We searched nine electronic databases for RCTs evaluating rotator cuff tear treatments from their inception through June 2017. A systematic review was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence-Decision Support Unit guidelines (Supplementary Table 1). Outcomes included functional improvement, pain one year after surgical treatment, and tendon structural integrity. The Bayesian network meta-analysis was applied for functional improvement and pain, based on an assumption of consistency and similarity. Tendon integrity was reported descriptively. Results: Fifteen RCTs were selected. Patients undergoing physiotherapy after open surgery showed statistically significant functional improvements compared with those undergoing physiotherapy only (mean differences, 9.1 [credible interval, 0.9–17.4]). Open surgery with physiotherapy was associated with a decrease in pain 1 year after treatment compared with when physiotherapy was combined with arthroscopic rotator cuff surgery, mini open surgery, platelet-rich plasma therapy, or physiotherapy alone (absolute value of mean difference 1.2 to 1.4). The tendon integrity results were inconsistent. Conclusions: Some surgical treatments were associated with significant improvement in function and pain, but evidence regarding their comparative effectiveness is still lacking. A well-designed RCT discussing functional and structural treatment outcomes is needed in future.


<separator>National Communicable Disease Surveillance System: A review on Information and Organizational Structures in Developed Countries Introduction: To obtain necessary information for managing communicable diseases, different countries have developed national communicable diseases surveillance systems (NCDSS). Exploiting the lesson learned from the leading countries in development of surveillance systems provides the foundation for developing these systems in other countries. In this study, the information and organizational structure of NCDSS in developed countries were reviewed. Methods: The study reviewed publications found on the organizational structure, content and data flow of NCDSS in the United States of America (USA), Australia and Germany that were published in English between 2000 and 2016. The publications were identified by searching the CINAHL, Science Direct, ProQuest, PubMed, Google Scholar databases and the related databases in selected countries. Results: Thirty-four studies were investigated. All of the reviewed countries have implemented the NCDSS. In majority of countries the department of health (DoH) is responsible for managing this system. The reviewed countries have created a minimum data set for reporting communicable diseases data and information. Conclusion: For developing NCDSS, establishing coordinator centers, setting the effective policies and procedures, providing appropriate communication infrastructures for data exchange and defining a communicable diseases minimum data set are essential.

<separator>Virtual Screening and Prediction of Binding of Caprine CSN1S2 Protein Tryptic Peptides to Glucokinase Introduction: Glucokinase (hexokinase D) is an enzyme that phosphorylates glucose in hepatocytes totrap it in the cell and prime it for conversion to other compounds, yet this enzyme has low affinity to bind with glucose. In Diabetes Mellituspatients, the blood glucose level is poorly controled. Material and Methods: This study explored the possibility to induce glucokinase activity with bioactive peptides derived from the goat milk protein CSN1S2 by in- silico docking approach. Two bioactive tryptic peptides, CSN1S2 residues 41-47 and 214-221, were successfully docked to glucokinase and found to bind to the activation site. Results: Amino acid residues Asn41, Ala43, His45 and Arg221 from these peptides provided the major contribution to docking to glucokinase. Asn41 made more interactions with glucokinase than the other residues in the peptide, including hydrogen bonds and salt-bridge These bioactive peptides appear to help glucokinase to bind glucose, since the number of hydrogen bonds between the protein and the glucose was higher and their distances shorter in the complex with the peptides without disturbing the glucose position for phosphorylation. Conclusion: Thus, the activation effect of the CSN1S2 derived bioactive peptides for glucokinase binding affinity of glucose is indicated by this study.

<separator>Splenic Localization of Primary Hydatid Cyst in a 27-Year-Old Sportsman Treated by PAIR Technique: Imaging Anatomy Assessment Introduction: In this paper, we report our experience with a case of primary hydatid cyst involving only the spleen in a 27-year-old sportsman treated by PAIR technique. Case Report: Five years before, a 27-year-old handball player being admitted to our hospital, it was detected the cyst in his spleen which size was 35 x 30 mm in diameter, by abdominal ultrasound during a systematic examination. There was no pain or any other symptoms at that time. Tests on the presence of echinococcus cysts were negative. After a period of 5 years, and regular check-ups, the patient began to feel a dull pain in the left upper quadrant area. The Echinococcus test was again negative. Puncture and aspiration of content was performed and sent to cytological analysis that confirmed the presence of Echinococcus. The CT finding showed the spleen in a normal position, shape, enlarged, 185 mm in longitudinal diameter (splenomegaly), with inhomogeneous parenchyma on the expense of rounded area with hyperdense halo, which did not opacify after contrast, located in the dorsal area of the spleen, 100×98 mm in diameter and which corresponded to the echinococcal cyst in differential diagnosis?clean dense contents (protein / haemorrhagic). Conclusion: The reported case is very specific, considering that handball is contact sport, where it is almost impossible to avoid the physical contact between players, which is sometimes even rough. Due to rough contacts, spleen trauma is something we should be very aware about, especially in cases of splenomegaly with hydatid cyst, where the spleen rupture might lead to fatal outcome. According to all this, careful follow up of this patient is necessary.

<separator>The Most Common Smartphone Applications Used By Medical Students and Barriers of Using Them Introduction: Medical knowledge is rapidly expanding and updating. It is very important that students can timely access to information and the latest scientific evidence without any time and place limitation. The smartphone is one of ICT tools that adopted greatly by healthcare professionals. Today, the most medical sciences universities have provided smartphone as an educational aid tool and acquisition licenses for medical apps resources in training of their students. Aim: This research was conducted to determine common smartphone applications among medical students of Urmia University of medical sciences and to identify barriers in using them. Materials and Methods: This research was a descriptive type of study carried out in 2016. Population of the study included 530 medical students completing the clinical course in Urmia University of Medical Sciences. Data were collected using researcher-developed questionnaire. The validity of it determined based on the view of experts and the reliability of it obtained by calculating the value of Cronbach?s alpha (a = 0.82). Results: 82.3% of the students had smartphone, which in terms of operating system the highest was related Andriod (53%) and iPhone (32%). The most common applications used often by medical students included Up to date, PubSearch, Calculate by QxMD, Epocrates and OMnio. Lack of accreditation of medical apps by valid health institutions (4.63), lack of support and update of applications by their developers (4.44), lack of adequate skill to use applications (4.25) are the most important barriers in using these applications among students. Conclusion: To assurance quality of medical apps, it seems very important that academic and healthcare organizations should be involved to develop and update the apps and also provided guidelines for accreditation of apps. It is recommended that for promotion of knowledge and skill of students provide essential educations.

<separator>The Most Influential Scientists in the Development of Medical Informatics (19): John Bryden John Bryden (1932-2012) was Public health consultant in Glasgow. Scotland. John Bryden graduated in medicine at Glasgow University in 1956 and after completing his national service worked in orthopedics and became a GP covering Mosspark and Govan. An early interest in optical character recognition and computer programming led to a three-year fellowship in administrative medicine and a diploma in Social medicine from Edinburgh University. In his final year he was on the commissioning team for Woodside Health Center and set up its computerized patient index, improving preventive medicine.

<separator>Lower Jaw Grip Strength in Healthy and Sick Population Measured by Special Force Transducer Introduction: One of the basic chronic diseases of the MFH domain that is treated on an outpatient basis is temporomandibular dysfunction (TMD). It represents a number of pathological conditions that lead to the dysfunction of the normal function of the stomatognatic system. Observing the etiologic factors of this condition, temporomandibular TM trauma, poor habits such as infantile type of swallowing, tongue depression, and tectogenic disturbance of the myofunctional squamous system are reported in order to reconstruct the defects of neighboring regions. Material and Methods: The study included 60 patients divided into 3 groups: Group I without predetermined temporomandibular dysfunction,Group II with TMD, and Group III where one of the muscles of the masticatory group was used during the reconstruction procedure. Results: Statistically obtained results show that in group III there is a large difference in postoperative measurement after 6 weeks. Discussion: In the mentioned patients divided into three groups, the measurement of the pressure strength expressed in N follows certain states with it measured values, which coincides with comparative studies. Conclusion: From the obtained results we conclude that the parameter used, the strength of the lower jaw bite is a significant indicator of the chewing system functioning.

<separator>A  Prerequisite for Patient Centred Care is Empowering and Engaging Patients in the Digital Health: Report from EFMI Special Topic Conference (STC) 2017 The European Federation for Medical Informatics (EFMI) held its Special Topic Conference (STC) in October 2017 in Israel. EFMI holds STC?s to focus on a particular issue, whereas its major annual conference Medical Informatics Europe (MIE) has a much wider remit. This conference challenged the informatics community to engage patients in digital health. Examples of the gap in digital engagementfrom the conference contributions include:An app to connect parents to a paediatric emergency department was presented. We heard how comparisons between general practice and paediatrician led health systems were being compromised through the lack of available databases and that Europe needs a fit-for-purpose paediatric electronic health records (EHR). The public should be involved in shared EHR platform development. We were informedpatients preferred clinicians to use their mobile device and how the online community can be a source of research subjects. A visualisation tool is being developed to display data about attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On a more sombre note the conference remembered Assa Reichert, a long standing member of EFMI. Notwithstanding our reflections on Assa?s service to EFMI and informatics, this conference provide a real opportunity to explore how digital health might empower patients.

<separator>Telemental Health Care, an Effective Alternative to Conventional Mental Care: a Systematic Review Background and Objectives: Due to the high costs of conventional mental health care, there has been a rise in the application of web-based technologies in recent years, i.e., telemental health care. We conducted this systematic review in 2017, using high quality research articles on the applications, technologies, advantages and challenges associated with telemental health care published since year 2000. Methods: We used a combination of relevant key words to search four major databases, such as ?Web of Sciences, Embase, PubMed and Science Direct?. From among 156 articles, which had been published since 2000, twenty five articles met all of the inclusion criteria and were selected for the final review. The information extracted from these articles were used to construct Tables 1 and 2. Also, the materials derived from 55 credible articles were used as further support and complementary facts to substantiate the information presented in the Discussion section. Results: The findings revealed that telemental health care is an extended domain supportive of conventional mental health services. Currently, telemental health care has multiple capabilities and technologies for providing effective interventions to patients with various mental illnesses. It provides clinicians with a wide variety of innovative choices and strategies for mental interventions, in addition to significant future potentials. Conclusions: Telemental health care can provide effective and adaptable solutions to the care of mental illnesses universally. While being comparable to in-person services, telemental health care is particularly advantageous and inexpensive through the use of current technologies and adaptable designs, especially in isolated communities.

<separator>Relationship Between Cybernetics Management and Organizational Trust Among Librarians of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences Background and purpose: Organization must keep current skills, abilities, and in the current field of competition, and move one step ahead of other competitors; for this purpose, must be a high degree of trust inside the organization. Cybernetic management is a new approach in management of organizations that its main task according to internal issues. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between cybernetics management and organizational trust among librarians of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences. Materials and methods: This is applied and analytical survey. which its population included all librarians of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, amounting to 42 people which were selected by census and participated in this research. Results: There has no relationship between components of Cybernetics management (participative decision making, commitment, pay equity, Correct flow of information, develop a sense of ownership, online education) with organizational trust amongst librarians of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences. And there has a significant relationship between flat Structure of cybernetics management and organizational trust. For data analysis was used Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and linear regression. Conclusion: There is no significant relationship between Cybernetic management and organizational trust amongst librarians of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences.

<separator>An Evaluation Protocol for Picture Archiving and Communication System: a Systematic Review Introduction: Picture archiving and communication system (PACS) serves to store, transmit, communicate and manage medical images. A logical evaluation protocol assists to determine whether the system is technically, structurally and operationally fit. The purpose of this systematic review was to propose a logical evaluation protocol for PACS, particularly useful for new hospitals and other healthcare institutions in developing countries. Methods and Materials: We systematically reviewed 25 out of 267 full-length articles, published between 2000 and 2017, retrieved from four sources: Science Direct, Scopus, PubMed and Google Scholar. The extracted data were tabulated and reviewed successively by three independent panels of experts that oversaw the design of this study and the process by which the PACS evaluation protocol was systematically developed. Results: The outcome data were ranked by expert panels and analyzed statistically, with the reliability established at 0.82 based on the Pearson?s correlation coefficient. The essential components and the best options to establish an optimal PACS were organized under nine main sections: system configuration; system network; data storage; data compression; image input; image characteristics; image presentation; communication link; and system security, with a total of 20 components, each of which capable of working optimally with one or more program options. Conclusions: This systematic review presents an objective protocol that is an ideal tool for the evaluation of new or existing PACS at healthcare institutions, particularly in developing countries. Despite the significant advantages, the protocol may face minor limitations, largely due to lack of appropriate technical resources in various clinical settings and the host countries.


<separator> Splice Expression Variation Analysis (SEVA) for Inter-tumor Heterogeneity of Gene Isoform Usage in Cancer.Motivation: Current bioinformatics methods to detect changes in gene isoformusage in distinct phenotypes compare the relative expected isoform usage inphenotypes. These statistics model differences in isoform usage in normaltissues, which have stable regulation of gene splicing. Pathological conditions, such as cancer, can have broken regulation of splicing that increases theheterogeneity of the expression of splice variants. Inferring events with suchdifferential heterogeneity in gene isoform usage requires new statisticalapproaches.Results: We introduce Splice Expression Variability Analysis (SEVA) to modelincreased heterogeneity of splice variant usage between conditions (e.g., tumorand normal samples). SEVA uses a rank-based multivariate statistic that compares the variability of junction expression profiles within one condition to thevariability within another. Simulated data show that SEVA is unique in modelingheterogeneity of gene isoform usage, and benchmark SEVA's performance againstEBSeq, DiffSplice, and rMATS that model differential isoform usage instead ofheterogeneity. We confirm the accuracy of SEVA in identifying known splicevariants in head and neck cancer and perform cross-study validation of novelsplice variants. A novel comparison of splice variant heterogeneity betweensubtypes of head and neck cancer demonstrated unanticipated similarity betweenthe heterogeneity of gene isoform usage in HPV-positive and HPV-negative subtypesand anticipated increased heterogeneity among HPV-negative samples with mutationsin genes that regulate the splice variant machinery.Conclusion: These results show that SEVA accurately models differentialheterogeneity of gene isoform usage from RNA-seq data.Availability: SEVA is implemented in the R/Bioconductor package GSReg.Contact: bahman@jhu.edu, ejfertig@jhmi.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator> PEATH: Single Individual Haplotyping by a Probabilistic Evolutionary Algorithm with Toggling.Motivation: Single individual haplotyping (SIH) is critical in genomicassociation studies and genetic diseases analysis. However, most genomic analysisstudies do not perform haplotype-phasing analysis due to its complexity. Several computational methods have been developed to solve the SIH problem, but theseapproaches have not generated sufficiently reliable haplotypes.Results: Here, we propose a novel SIH algorithm, called PEATH (ProbabilisticEvolutionary Algorithm with Toggling for Haplotyping), to achieve more accurateand reliable haplotyping. The proposed PEATH method was compared to the mostrecent algorithms in terms of the phased length, N50 length, switch error rate,and minimum error correction. The PEATH algorithm consistently provides the best phase and N50 lengths, as long as possible, given datasets. In addition,verification of the simulation data demonstrated that the PEATH methodoutperforms other methods on high noisy data. Additionally, the experimentalresults of a real dataset confirmed that the PEATH method achieved comparable or better accuracy.Availability: Source code of PEATH is available athttps://github.com/jcna99/PEATH.Contact: Je-Keun Rhee jkrhee@catholic.ac.kr, Soo-Yong Shinsooyong.shin@khu.ac.kr.

<separator> MAGNAMWAR: An R package for genome-wide association studies of bacterial orthologs.Summary: Here we report on an R package for genome-wide association studies oforthologous genes in bacteria. Before using the software, orthologs frombacterial genomes or metagenomes are defined using local or onlineimplementations of OrthoMCL. These presence-absence patterns are statisticallyassociated with variation in user-collected phenotypes using the Mono-Associated GNotobiotic Animals Metagenome-Wide Association R package (MAGNAMWAR).Genotype-phenotype associations can be performed with several differentstatistical tests based on the type and distribution of the data.Availability and implementation: MAGNAMWAR is available on CRAN.Contact: john_chaston@byu.edu.


<separator> QuantumClone: Clonal assessment of functional mutations in cancer based on a genotype-aware method for clonal reconstruction.Motivation: In cancer, clonal evolution is assessed based on information comingfrom single nucleotide variants and copy number alterations. Nonetheless,existing methods often fail to accurately combine information from both sourcesto truthfully reconstruct clonal populations in a given tumor sample or in a set of tumor samples coming from the same patient. Moreover, previously publishedmethods detect clones from a single set of variants. As a result, compromiseshave to be done between stringent variant filtering (reducing dispersion invariant allele frequency estimates, VAFs) and using all biologically relevantvariants.Results: We present a framework for defining cancer clones using most reliablevariants of high depth of coverage and assigning functional mutations to thedetected clones. The key element of our framework is QuantumClone, a method forvariant clustering into clones based on VAFs, genotypes of corresponding regions and information about tumor purity. We validated QuantumClone and our frameworkon simulated data. We then applied our framework to whole genome sequencing data for 19 neuroblastoma trios each including constitutional, diagnosis and relapsesamples. We confirmed an enrichment of damaging variants within such pathways as MAPK, neuritogenesis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cell survival and DNArepair. Most pathways had more damaging variants in the expanding clones comparedto shrinking ones, which can be explained by the increased total number ofvariants between these two populations. Functional mutational rate varied forancestral clones and clones shrinking or expanding upon treatment, suggestingchanges in clone selection mechanisms at different time points of tumorevolution.Availability and Implementation: Source code and binaries of the QuantumClone Rpackage are freely available for download athttps://CRAN.R-project.org/package=QuantumClone.Contact: gudrun.schleiermacher@curie.fr or valentina.boeva@inserm.fr.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.,


<separator> Informational and Linguistic Analysis of Large Genomic Sequence Collections via Efficient Hadoop Cluster Algorithms.Motivation: Information theoretic and compositional/linguistic analysis ofgenomes have a central role in bioinformatics, even more so since the associated methodologies are becoming very valuable also for epigenomic and meta-genomicstudies. The kernel of those methods is based on the collection of k-merstatistics, i.e., how many times each k-mer in A;C; G; T k occurs in a DNAsequence. Although this problem is computationally very simple and efficientlysolvable on a conventional computer, the sheer amount of data available now inapplications demands to resort to parallel and distributed computing. Indeed,those type of algorithms have been developed to collect k-mer statistics in therealm of genome assembly. However, they are so specialized to this domain thatthey do not extend easily to the computation of informational and linguisticindices, concurrently on sets of genomes.Results: Following the well established approach in many disciplines, and with a growing success also in bioinformatics, to resort to MapReduce and Hadoop to dealwith Big Data problems, we present KCH, the first set of MapReduce algorithmsable to perform concurrently informational and linguistic analysis of largecollections of genomic sequences on a Hadoop cluster. The benchmarking of KCHthat we provide indicates that it is quite effective and versatile. It is alsocompetitive with respect to the parallel and distributed algorithms highlyspecialized to k-mer statistics collection for genome assembly problems. Inconclusion, KCH is a much needed addition to the growing number of algorithms andtools that use MapReduce for bioinformatics core applications.Availability: The software, including instructions for running it over AmazonAWS, as well as the datasets are available at http://www.di-srv.unisa.it/KCH.Contact: umberto.ferraro@uniroma1.it.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.


<separator> A Rapid Epistatic Mixed-model Association Analysis by Linear Retransformations of Genomic Estimated Values.Motivation: Epistasis provides a feasible way for probing potential geneticmechanism of complex traits. However, time-consuming computation challengessuccessful detection of interaction in practice, especially when linear mixedmodel (LMM) is used to control type I error in the presence of populationstructure and cryptic relatedness.Results: A rapid epistatic mixed-model association analysis (REMMA) method wasdeveloped to overcome computational limitation. This method first estimatesindividuals' epistatic effects by an extended genomic best linear unbiasedprediction (EG-BLUP) model with additive and epistatic kinship matrix, thenpairwise interaction effects are obtained by linear retransformations ofindividuals' epistatic effects. Simulation studies showed that REMMA couldcontrol type I error and increase statistical power in detecting epistatic QTNsin comparison with existing LMM-based FaST-LMM. We applied REMMA to two realdatasets, a mouse dataset and the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) data. Application to the mouse data further confirmed the performance of REMMA incontrolling type I error. For the WTCCC data, we found most epistatic QTNs fortype 1 diabetes (T1D) located in a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region,from which a large interacting network with 12 hub genes (interacting with ten ormore genes) was established.Availability and Implementation: Our REMMA method can be freely accessed athttps://github.com/chaoning/REMMA.Contact: liujf@cau.edu.cn.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.


<separator>iPat: Intelligent Prediction and Association Tool for Genomic Research.Summary: The ultimate goal of genomic research is to effectively predictphenotypes from genotypes so that medical management can improve human health andmolecular breeding can increase agricultural production. Genomic prediction orselection (GS) plays a complementary role to genome-wide association studies(GWAS), which is the primary method to identify genes underlying phenotypes.Unfortunately, most computing tools cannot perform data analyses for both GWASand GS. Furthermore, the majority of these tools are executed through acommand-line interface (CLI), which requires programming skills. Non-programmers struggle to use them efficiently because of the steep learning curves and zerotolerance for data formats and mistakes when inputting keywords and parameters.To address these problems, this study developed a software package, named theIntelligent Prediction and Association Tool (iPat), with a user-friendlygraphical user interface (GUI). With iPat, GWAS or GS can be performed using apointing device to simply drag and/or click on graphical elements to specifyinput data files, choose input parameters, and select analytical models. Modelsavailable to users include those implemented in third party CLI packages such as GAPIT, PLINK, FarmCPU, BLINK, rrBLUP, and BGLR. Users can choose any data format and conduct analyses with any of these packages. File conversions areautomatically conducted for specified input data and selected packages. AGWAS-assisted genomic prediction method was implemented to perform genomicprediction using any GWAS method such as FarmCPU. iPat was written in Java foradaptation to multiple operating systems including Windows, Mac, and Linux.Availability: The iPat executable file, user manual, tutorials, and exampledatasets are freely available at http://zzlab.net/iPat.Contact: Zhiwu.Zhang@WSU.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>PyChimera: Use UCSF Chimera modules in any Python 2.7 project.Motivation: UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004) is a powerful visualizationtool remarkably present in the computational chemistry and structural biologycommunities. Built on a C?++ core wrapped under a Python 2.7 environment, onecould expect to easily import UCSF Chimera's arsenal of resources in customscripts or software projects. Nonetheless, this is not readily possible if thescript is not executed within UCSF Chimera due to the isolation of the platform. UCSF ChimeraX (Goddard et al., 2017), successor to the original Chimera,partially solves the problem but yet major upgrades need to be undergone so that this updated version can offer all UCSF Chimera features.Results: PyChimera has been developed to overcome these limitations and provideaccess to the UCSF Chimera codebase from any Python 2.7 interpreter, includinginteractive programming with tools like IPython (Perez and Granger, 2007) andJupyter Notebooks, making it easier to use with additional third-party software.Availability: PyChimera is LGPL-licensed and available athttps://github.com/insilichem/pychimera.Contact: jaime.rodriguezguerra@uab.cat, jeandidier.marechal@uab.cat.

<separator>A benchmark study of scoring methods for non-coding mutations.Motivation: Detailed knowledge of coding sequences has led to different candidatemodels for pathogenic variant prioritization. Several deleteriousness scores havebeen proposed for the non-coding part of the genome, but no large-scalecomparison has been realized to date to assess their performance.Results: We compared the leading scoring tools (CADD, FATHMM-MKL, Funseq2 andGWAVA) and some recent competitors (DANN, SNP and SOM scores) for their abilityto discriminate assumed pathogenic variants from assumed benign variants (usingthe ClinVar, COSMIC and 1000 genomes project databases). Using the ClinVarbenchmark, CADD was the best tool for detecting the pathogenic variants that are mainly located in protein coding gene regions. Using the COSMIC benchmark,FATHMM-MKL, GWAVA and SOMliver outperformed the other tools for pathogenicvariants that are typically located in lincRNAs, pseudogenes, and other parts of the non-coding genome. However, all tools had low precision, which couldpotentially be improved by future non-coding genome feature discoveries. Theseresults may have been influenced by the presence of potential benign variants in the COSMIC database. The development of a gold standard as consistent as ClinVar for these regions will be necessary to confirm our tool ranking.Availability and Implementation: The Snakemake, C?++ and R codes are freelyavailable from https://github.com/Oncostat/BenchmarkNCVTools and supported onLinux.Contact: damien.drubay@gustaveroussy.fr.Supplementary information: Supplementary results are available at Bioinformatics online.

<separator>LeNup: Learning Nucleosome positioning from DNA sequences with improvedconvolutional neural networks.Motivation: Nucleosome positioning plays significant roles in proper genomepacking and its accessibility to execute transcription regulation. Despite amultitude of nucleosome positioning resources available on line includingexperimental datasets of genome-wide nucleosome occupancy profiles andcomputational tools to the analysis on these data, the complex language ofeukaryotic Nucleosome positioning remains incompletely understood.Results: Here, we address this challenge using an approach based on astate-of-the-art machine learning method. We present a novel convolutional neuralnetwork (CNN) to understand nucleosome positioning. We combined Inception-likenetworks with a gating mechanism for the response of multiple patterns and longterm association in DNA sequences. We developed the open-source package LeNupbased on the CNN to predict nucleosome positioning in Homo sapiens,Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster as well as Saccharomycescerevisiae genomes. We trained LeNup on four benchmark datasets. LeNup achievedgreater predictive accuracy than previously published methods.Availability: LeNup is freely available as Python and Lua script source codeunder a BSD style license from https://github.com/biomedBit/LeNup.Contact: jhzhang@bit.edu.cn.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.,

<separator>Enrichment analysis with EpiAnnotator.Motivation: Deciphering relevant biological insights from epigenomic data can be a challenging task. One commonly used approach is to perform enrichment analysis.However, finding, downloading and using the publicly available functionalannotations requires time, programming skills and IT infrastructure. Here wedescribe the online tool EpiAnnotator for performing enrichment analyses onepigenomic data in a fast and user-friendly way.Results: EpiAnnotator is an R Package accompanied by a web interface. It containsregularly updated annotations from 4 public databases: Blueprint, RoadMap,GENCODE and the UCSC Genome Browser. Annotations are hosted locally or in aserver environment and automatically updated by scripts of our own design.Thousands of tracks are available, reflecting data on a variety of tissues, cell types and cell lines from the human and mouse genomes. Users need to upload sets of selected and background regions. Results are displayed in customizable andeasily interpretable figures.Availability: The R package and Shiny app are open source and available under theGPL v3 license. EpiAnnotator's web interface is accessible athttp://computational-epigenomics.com/en/epiannotator.Contact: epiannotator@computational-epigenomics.com.

<separator>A network approach to exploring the functional basis of gene-gene epistaticinteractions in disease susceptibility.Motivation: Individual genetic variants explain only a small fraction ofheritability in some diseases. Some variants have weak marginal effects ondisease risk, but their joint effects are significantly stronger when occurringtogether. Most studies on such epistatic interactions have focused on methods foridentifying the interactions and interpreting individual cases, but few haveexplored their general functional basis. This was due to the lack of acomprehensive list of epistatic interactions and uncertainties in associatingvariants to genes.Results: We conducted a large-scale survey of published research articles tocompile the first comprehensive list of epistatic interactions in human diseases with detailed annotations. We used various methods to associate these variants togenes to ensure robustness. We found that these genes are significantly moreconnected in protein interaction networks, are more co-expressed, and participatemore often in the same pathways. We demonstrate using the list to discover novel disease pathways.Contact: kevinyip@cse.cuhk.edu.hk.

<separator>Discovering personalized driver mutation profiles of single samples in cancer by network control strategy.Motivation: It is a challenging task to discover personalized driver genes thatprovide crucial information on disease risk and drug sensitivity for individualpatients. However, few methods have been proposed to identify thepersonalized-sample driver genes from the cancer omics data due to the lack ofsamples for each individual. To circumvent this problem, here we present a novel single-sample controller strategy (SCS) to identify personalized driver mutation profiles from network controllability perspective.Results: SCS integrates mutation data and expression data into a referencemolecular network for each patient to obtain the driver mutation profiles in apersonalized-sample manner. This is the first such a computational framework, to bridge the personalized driver mutation discovery problem and the structuralnetwork controllability problem. The key idea of SCS is to detect those mutatedgenes which can achieve the transition from the normal state to the disease statebased on each individual omics data from network controllability perspective. We widely validate the driver mutation profiles of our SCS from three aspects: (i)the improved precision for the predicted driver genes in the population compared with other driver-focus methods; (ii) the effectiveness for discovering thepersonalized driver genes; (iii) the application to the risk assessment throughthe integration of the driver mutation signature and expression data respectivelyacross the five distinct benchmarks from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Inconclusion, our SCS makes efficient and robust personalized driver mutationprofiles predictions, opening new avenues in personalized medicine and targetedcancer therapy.Availability: The MATLAB-package for our SCS is freely available fromhttp://sysbio.sibcb.ac.cn/cb/chenlab/software.htm.Contact: zhangsw@nwpu.edu.cn, zengtao@sibs.ac.cn, lnchen@sibs.ac.cn.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>pyHVis3D: Visualising Molecular Simulation deduced H-bond networks in 3D:Application to T-cell receptor interactions.Motivation: Hydrogen bonds (H-bonds) play an essential role for many molecularinteractions but are also often transient, making visualizing them in a flexible system challenging.Results: We provide pyHVis3D which allows for an easy to interpret 3Dvisualisation of H-bonds resulting from molecular simulations. We demonstrate thepower of pyHVis3D by using it to explain the changes in experimentally measuredbinding affinities for three T-cell receptor/peptide/MHC complexes and mutants ofeach of these complexes.Availability: pyHVis3D can be downloaded for free fromhttp://opig.stats.ox.ac.uk/resources.Contact: science.bernhard.knapp@gmail.com.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Sensitive and specific post-call filtering of genetic variants in xenograft andprimary tumors.Motivation: Tumor genome sequencing offers great promise for guiding research andtherapy, but spurious variant calls can arise from multiple sources. Mousecontamination can generate many spurious calls when sequencing patient-derivedxenografts (PDXs). Paralogous genome sequences can also generate spurious callswhen sequencing any tumor. We developed a BLAST-based algorithm, MAPEX, toidentify and filter out spurious calls from both these sources.Results: When calling variants from xenografts, MAPEX has similar sensitivity andspecificity to more complex algorithms. When applied to any tumor, MAPEX alsoautomatically flags calls that potentially arise from paralogous sequences. Ourimplementation, mapexr, runs quickly and easily on a desktop computer. MAPEX isthus a useful addition to almost any pipeline for calling genetic variants intumors.Availability: The mapexr package for R is available athttps://github.com/bmannakee/mapexr under the MIT license.Contact: mannakee@email.arizona.edu, rgutenk@email.arizona.edu,eknudsen@email.arizona.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Toppar: An interactive browser for viewing association study results.Summary: Data integration and visualization help geneticists make sense of large amounts of data. To help facilitate interpretation of genetic association data wedeveloped Toppar, a customizable visualization tool that stores results fromassociation studies and enables browsing over multiple results, by combiningfeatures from existing tools and linking to appropriate external databases.Availability: Detailed information on Toppar's features and functionality are on our website http://mccarthy.well.ox.ac.uk/toppar/docs along with instructions on how to download, install and run Toppar. Our online version of Toppar isaccessible from the website and can be test-driven using Firefox, Safari orChrome on sub-sets of publicly available genome-wide association study (GWAS)anthropometric waist and body mass index (BMI) data (Locke, et al., 2015;Shungin, et al., 2015) from the Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits(GIANT) consortium.Contact: totajuliusd@gmail.com.

<separator>Tumor purity quantification by clonal DNA methylation signatures.Motivation: Controlling for tumor purity in molecular analyses is essential toallow for reliable genomic aberration calls, for inter-sample comparison and tomonitor heterogeneity of cancer cell populations. In genome wide screeningstudies, the assessment of tumor purity is typically performed by means ofcomputational methods that exploit somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs).Results: We present a strategy, called PAMES (Purity Assessment from clonalMEthylation Sites), which uses the methylation level of a few dozen, highlyclonal, tumor type specific CpG sites to estimate the purity of tumor samples,without the need of a matched benign control. We trained and validated our methodin more than 6,000 samples from different datasets. Purity estimates by PAMESwere highly concordant with other state-of-the-art tools and its evaluation in a cancer cell line dataset highlights its reliability to accurately estimate tumor admixtures.We extended the capability of PAMES to the analysis of CpG islandsinstead of the more platform-specific CpG sites and demonstrated its accuracy in a set of advanced tumors profiled by high throughput DNA methylation sequencing. These analyses show that PAMES is a valuable tool to assess the purity of tumorsamples in the settings of clinical research and diagnostics.Availability: https://github.com/cgplab/PAMES.Contact: matteo.benelli@uslcentro.toscana.it, f.demichelis@unitn.it.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>CGManalyzer:an R package for analyzing continuous glucose monitoring studies.Summary: The R package CGManalyzer contains functions for analyzing data from acontinuous glucose monitoring (CGM) study. It covers a wide and comprehensiverange of data analysis methods including reading a series of datasets, obtaining summary statistics of glucose levels, plotting data, transforming the time stamp format, fixing missing values, evaluating the mean of daily difference (MODD) andcontinuous overlapping net glycemic action (CONGA), calculating multiscale sampleentropy (MSE), conducting pairwise comparison, displaying results using variousplots including a new type of plot called an antenna plot, etc. This package has been developed from our work in directly analyzing data from various CGM devices such as the FreeStyle Libre, Glutalor, Dexcom, and Medtronic CGM. Thus, thispackage should greatly facilitate the analysis of various CGM studies.Availability: The package for Windows is available from CRAN:http://cran.r-project.org/mirrors.html. The source file CGManalyzer_1.0.tar.gz isavailable at Bioinformatics online and the website of Zhang's labhttp://quantitativelabfhsdev.pclan.umac.mo/analytic-tool/.Contact: douglaszhang@umac.mo.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline and the website of Zhang's lab.

<separator>QUENTIN: reconstruction of disease transmissions from viral quasispecies genomic data.Motivation: Genomic analysis has become one of the major tools for diseaseoutbreak investigations. However, existing computational frameworks for inferenceof transmission history from viral genomic data often do not consider intra-host diversity of pathogens and heavily rely on additional epidemiological data, such as sampling times and exposure intervals. This impedes genomic analysis ofoutbreaks of highly mutable viruses associated with chronic infections, such ashuman immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis C virus, whose transmissions are oftencarried out through minor intra-host variants, while the additionalepidemiological information often is either unavailable or has a limited use.Results: The proposed framework QUasispecies Evolution, Network-basedTransmission INference (QUENTIN) addresses the above challenges by evolutionaryanalysis of intra-host viral populations sampled by deep sequencing and Bayesian inference using general properties of social networks relevant to infectiondissemination. This method allows inference of transmission direction evenwithout the supporting case-specific epidemiological information, identifytransmission clusters and reconstruct transmission history. QUENTIN was validatedon experimental and simulated data, and applied to investigate HCV transmissionwithin a community of hosts with high-risk behavior. It is available athttps://github.com/skumsp/QUENTIN.Contact: pskums@gsu.edu or alexz@cs.gsu.edu or rahul@sfsu.edu or yek0@cdc.gov.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Faucet: streaming de novo assembly graph construction.Motivation: We present Faucet, a two-pass streaming algorithm for assembly graph construction. Faucet builds an assembly graph incrementally as each read isprocessed. Thus, reads need not be stored locally, as they can be processed whiledownloading data and then discarded. We demonstrate this functionality byperforming streaming graph assembly of publicly available data, and observe that the ratio of disk use to raw data size decreases as coverage is increased.Results: Faucet pairs the de Bruijn graph obtained from the reads with additionalmeta-data derived from them. We show these metadata-coverage counts collected at junction k-mers and connections bridging between junction pairs-contain mostsalient information needed for assembly, and demonstrate they enable cleaning of metagenome assembly graphs, greatly improving contiguity while maintainingaccuracy. We compared Fauceted resource use and assembly quality to state of the art metagenome assemblers, as well as leading resource-efficient genomeassemblers. Faucet used orders of magnitude less time and disk space than thespecialized metagenome assemblers MetaSPAdes and Megahit, while also improving ontheir memory use; this broadly matched performance of other assemblers optimizingresource efficiency-namely, Minia and LightAssembler. However, on metagenomestested, Faucet,o outputs had 14-110% higher mean NGA50 lengths compared withMinia, and 2- to 11-fold higher mean NGA50 lengths compared with LightAssembler, the only other streaming assembler available.Availability and implementation: Faucet is available athttps://github.com/Shamir-Lab/Faucet.Contact: rshamir@tau.ac.il or eranhalperin@gmail.com.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>A novel data structure to support ultra-fast taxonomic classification ofmetagenomic sequences with k-mer signatures.Motivation: Metagenomic read classification is a critical step in theidentification and quantification of microbial species sampled by high-throughputsequencing. Although many algorithms have been developed to date, they suffersignificant memory and/or computational costs. Due to the growing popularity ofmetagenomic data in both basic science and clinical applications, as well as the increasing volume of data being generated, efficient and accurate algorithms are in high demand.Results: We introduce MetaOthello, a probabilistic hashing classifier formetagenomic sequencing reads. The algorithm employs a novel data structure,called l-Othello, to support efficient querying of a taxon using its k-mersignatures. MetaOthello is an order-of-magnitude faster than the currentstate-of-the-art algorithms Kraken and Clark, and requires only one-third of the RAM. In comparison to Kaiju, a metagenomic classification tool using proteinsequences instead of genomic sequences, MetaOthello is three times faster andexhibits 20-30% higher classification sensitivity. We report comparative analysesof both scalability and accuracy using a number of simulated and empiricaldatasets.Availability and implementation: MetaOthello is a stand-alone program implementedin C?++. The current version (1.0) is accessible viahttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.808941.Contact: liuj@cs.uky.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>A nonparametric significance test for sampled networks.Motivation: Our work is motivated by an interest in constructing aprotein-protein interaction network that captures key features associated withParkinson's disease. While there is an abundance of subnetwork constructionmethods available, it is often far from obvious which subnetwork is the mostsuitable starting point for further investigation.Results: We provide a method to assess whether a subnetwork constructed from aseed list (a list of nodes known to be important in the area of interest) differssignificantly from a randomly generated subnetwork. The proposed method uses aMonte Carlo approach. As different seed lists can give rise to the samesubnetwork, we control for redundancy by constructing a minimal seed list as the starting point for the significance test. The null model is based on random seed lists of the same length as a minimum seed list that generates the subnetwork; inthis random seed list the nodes have (approximately) the same degree distributionas the nodes in the minimum seed list. We use this null model to selectsubnetworks which deviate significantly from random on an appropriate set ofstatistics and might capture useful information for a real world protein-protein interaction network.Availability and implementation: The software used in this paper are availablefor download at https://sites.google.com/site/elliottande/. The software iswritten in Python and uses the NetworkX library.Contact: ande.elliott@gmail.com or felix.reed-tsochas@sbs.ox.ac.uk.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>An accurate algorithm for the detection of DNA fragments from dilution poolsequencing experiments.Motivation: The short read lengths of current high-throughput sequencingtechnologies limit the ability to recover long-range haplotype information.Dilution pool methods for preparing DNA sequencing libraries from high molecular weight DNA fragments enable the recovery of long DNA fragments from shortsequence reads. These approaches require computational methods for identifyingthe DNA fragments using aligned sequence reads and assembling the fragments into long haplotypes. Although a number of computational methods have been developedfor haplotype assembly, the problem of identifying DNA fragments from dilutionpool sequence data has not received much attention.Results: We formulate the problem of detecting DNA fragments from dilution poolsequencing experiments as a genome segmentation problem and develop an algorithm that uses dynamic programming to optimize a likelihood function derived from agenerative model for the sequence reads. This algorithm uses an iterativeapproach to automatically infer the mean background read depth and the number of fragments in each pool. Using simulated data, we demonstrate that our method,FragmentCut, has 25-30% greater sensitivity compared with an HMM based method forfragment detection and can also detect overlapping fragments. On a whole-genomehuman fosmid pool dataset, the haplotypes assembled using the fragmentsidentified by FragmentCut had greater N50 length, 16.2% lower switch error rateand 35.8% lower mismatch error rate compared with two existing methods. Wefurther demonstrate the greater accuracy of our method using two additionaldilution pool datasets.Availability and implementation: FragmentCut is available fromhttps://bansal-lab.github.io/software/FragmentCut.Contact: vibansal@ucsd.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.,

<separator>DIMM-SC: a Dirichlet mixture model for clustering droplet-based single celltranscriptomic data.Motivation: Single cell transcriptome sequencing (scRNA-Seq) has become arevolutionary tool to study cellular and molecular processes at single cellresolution. Among existing technologies, the recently developed droplet-basedplatform enables efficient parallel processing of thousands of single cells with direct counting of transcript copies using Unique Molecular Identifier (UMI).Despite the technology advances, statistical methods and computational tools are still lacking for analyzing droplet-based scRNA-Seq data. Particularly,model-based approaches for clustering large-scale single cell transcriptomic dataare still under-explored.Results: We developed DIMM-SC, a Dirichlet Mixture Model for clusteringdroplet-based Single Cell transcriptomic data. This approach explicitly modelsUMI count data from scRNA-Seq experiments and characterizes variations acrossdifferent cell clusters via a Dirichlet mixture prior. We performed comprehensivesimulations to evaluate DIMM-SC and compared it with existing clustering methods such as K-means, CellTree and Seurat. In addition, we analyzed public scRNA-Seqdatasets with known cluster labels and in-house scRNA-Seq datasets from a studyof systemic sclerosis with prior biological knowledge to benchmark and validateDIMM-SC. Both simulation studies and real data applications demonstrated thatoverall, DIMM-SC achieves substantially improved clustering accuracy and muchlower clustering variability compared to other existing clustering methods. More importantly, as a model-based approach, DIMM-SC is able to quantify theclustering uncertainty for each single cell, facilitating rigorous statisticalinference and biological interpretations, which are typically unavailable fromexisting clustering methods.Availability and implementation: DIMM-SC has been implemented in a user-friendly R package with a detailed tutorial available onwww.pitt.edu/~wec47/singlecell.html.Contact: wei.chen@chp.edu or hum@ccf.org.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Irys Extract.Summary: Irys Extract is a software tool for generating genomic information from data collected by the BioNano Genomics Irys platform. The tool allows the usereasy access to the raw data in the form of cropped images and genetically alignedintensity profiles. The latter are also made compatible with the BED format forusing with popular genomic browsers such as the UCSC Genome Browser.Availability and implementation: Irys Extract has been developed in MatlabR2015a, it was tested to work with IrysView 2.4.0.15879 and AutoDetect2.1.4.9159, and it currently runs under Microsoft Windows operating systems(7-10). Irys Extract can be downloaded alongside its manual and a demo dataset athttp://www.nanobiophotonix.com and https://sites.google.com/site/raniarielly/.Contact: uv@post.tau.ac.il.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>In silico structural modeling of multiple epigenetic marks on DNA.Availability and implementation: The code together with examples and tutorialsare available from http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/mosaics.Contact: peter.minary@cs.ox.ac.uk.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>PySCeSToolbox: a collection of metabolic pathway analysis tools.Summary: PySCeSToolbox is an extension to the Python Simulator for CellularSystems (PySCeS) that includes tools for performing generalized supply-demandanalysis, symbolic metabolic control analysis, and a framework for investigating the kinetic and thermodynamic aspects of enzyme-catalyzed reactions. Each tooladdresses a different aspect of metabolic behaviour, control, and regulation; thetools complement each other and can be used in conjunction to better understandhigher level system behaviour.Availability and implementation: PySCeSToolbox is available on Linux, Mac OS Xand Windows. It is licensed under the BSD 3-clause licence. Code, setup instructions and a link to documentation can be found athttps://github.com/PySCeS/PyscesToolbox.Contact: jr@sun.ac.za.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Enhanced guide-RNA design and targeting analysis for precise CRISPR genomeediting of single and consortia of industrially relevant and non-model organisms.Motivation: Genetic diversity of non-model organisms offers a repertoire ofunique phenotypic features for exploration and cultivation for synthetic biology and metabolic engineering applications. To realize this enormous potential, it iscritical to have an efficient genome editing tool for rapid strain engineering ofthese organisms to perform novel programmed functions.Results: To accommodate the use of CRISPR/Cas systems for genome editing acrossorganisms, we have developed a novel method, named CRISPR Associated Software forPathway Engineering and Research (CASPER), for identifying on- and off-targetswith enhanced predictability coupled with an analysis of non-unique (repeated)targets to assist in editing any organism with various endonucleases. UtilizingCASPER, we demonstrated a modest 2.4% and significant 30.2% improvement (F-test, P?\u003c?0.05) over the conventional methods for predicting on- and off-targetactivities, respectively. Further we used CASPER to develop novel applications ingenome editing: multitargeting analysis (i.e. simultaneous multiple-sitemodification on a target genome with a sole guide-RNA requirement) andmultispecies population analysis (i.e. guide-RNA design for genome editing acrossa consortium of organisms). Our analysis on a selection of industrially relevant organisms revealed a number of non-unique target sites associated with genes and transposable elements that can be used as potential sites for multitargeting. Theanalysis also identified shared and unshared targets that enable genome editingof single or multiple genomes in a consortium of interest. We envision CASPER as a useful platform to enhance the precise CRISPR genome editing for metabolicengineering and synthetic biology applications.Availability and implementation: https://github.com/TrinhLab/CASPER.Contact: ctrinh@utk.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>iPromoter-2L: a two-layer predictor for identifying promoters and their types by multi-window-based PseKNC.Motivation: Being responsible for initiating transaction of a particular gene in genome, promoter is a short region of DNA. Promoters have various types withdifferent functions. Owing to their importance in biological process, it ishighly desired to develop computational tools for timely identifying promotersand their types. Such a challenge has become particularly critical and urgent in facing the avalanche of DNA sequences discovered in the postgenomic age. Althoughsome prediction methods were developed, they can only be used to discriminate aspecific type of promoters from non-promoters. None of them has the ability toidentify the types of promoters. This is due to the facts that different types ofpromoters may share quite similar consensus sequence pattern, and that thepromoters of same type may have considerably different consensus sequences.Results: To overcome such difficulty, using the multi-window-based PseKNC (pseudoK-tuple nucleotide composition) approach to incorporate the short-, middle-, and long-range sequence information, we have developed a two-layer seamless predictornamed as 'iPromoter-2?L'. The first layer serves to identify a query DNA sequenceas a promoter or non-promoter, and the second layer to predict which of thefollowing six types the identified promoter belongs to: s24, s28, s32, s38, s54and s70.Availability and implementation: For the convenience of most experimentalscientists, a user-friendly and publicly accessible web-server for the powerfulnew predictor has been established athttp://bioinformatics.hitsz.edu.cn/iPromoter-2L/. It is anticipated thatiPromoter-2?L will become a very useful high throughput tool for genome analysis.Contact: bliu@hit.edu.cn or dshuang@tongji.edu.cn orkcchou@gordonlifescience.org.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Mobi 2.0: an improved method to define intrinsic disorder, mobility and linearbinding regions in protein structures.Motivation: The structures contained in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) database are of paramount importance to define our knowledge of folded proteins. Whileproviding mainly circumstantial evidence, PDB data is also increasingly used todefine the lack of unique structure, represented by mobile regions and evenintrinsic disorder (ID). However, alternative definitions are used by differentauthors and potentially limit the generality of the analyses being carried out.Results: Here we present Mobi 2.0, a completely re-written version of the Mobisoftware for the determination of mobile and potentially disordered regions from PDB structures. Mobi 2.0 provides robust definitions of mobility based on fourmain sources of information: (i) missing residues, (ii) residues with hightemperature factors, (iii) mobility between different models of the samestructure and (iv) binding to another protein or nucleotide chain. Mobi 2.0 iswell suited to aggregate information across different PDB structures for the sameUniProt protein sequence, providing consensus annotations. The software isexpected to standardize the treatment of mobility, allowing an easier comparison across different studies related to ID.Availability: Mobi 2.0 provides the structure-based annotation for the MobiDBdatabase. The software is available from URL http://protein.bio.unipd.it/mobi2/.Contact: silvio.tosatto@unipd.it.

<separator>CSAR: a contig scaffolding tool using algebraic rearrangements.Summary: Advances in next generation sequencing have generated massive amounts ofshort reads. However, assembling genome sequences from short reads still remains a challenging task. Due to errors in reads and large repeats in the genome, many of current assembly tools usually produce just collections of contigs whoserelative positions and orientations along the genome being sequenced are stillunknown. To address this issue, a scaffolding process to order and orient thecontigs of a draft genome is needed for completing the genome sequence. In thiswork, we propose a new scaffolding tool called CSAR that can efficiently and moreaccurately order and orient the contigs of a given draft genome based on areference genome of a related organism. In particular, the reference genomerequired by CSAR is not necessary to be complete in sequence. Our experimentalresults on real datasets have shown that CSAR outperforms other similar toolssuch as Projector2, OSLay and Mauve Aligner in terms of average sensitivity,precision, F-score, genome coverage, NGA50 and running time.Availability and implementation: The program of CSAR can be downloaded fromhttps://github.com/ablab-nthu/CSAR.Contact: hchiu@mail.ncku.edu.tw or cllu@cs.nthu.edu.tw.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>SMLocalizer, a GPU accelerated ImageJ plugin for single molecule localizationmicroscopy.Summary: SMLocalizer combines the availability of ImageJ with the power of GPUprocessing for fast and accurate analysis of single molecule localizationmicroscopy data. Analysis of 2D and 3D data in multiple channels is supported.Availability and implementation: Plugin freely available for Fiji and ImageJ2.0through https://sourceforge.net/projects/smlocalizer/. Plugin also available for continuous updates through ImageJ update system, addhttp://sites.imagej.net/Cellular-Biophysics-KTH/ as update site in ImageJ. Javaand CUDA source code freely available on the web athttps://github.com/KristofferBernhem/SMlocalizer.Contact: brismar@kth.se.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>CRISPR-RT: a web application for designing CRISPR-C2c2 crRNA with improved targetspecificity.Summary: CRISPR-Cas systems have been successfully applied in genome editing.Recently, the CRISPR-C2c2 system has been reported as a tool for RNA editing.Here we describe CRISPR-RT (CRISPR RNA-Targeting), the first web application tohelp biologists design crRNAs with improved target specificity for theCRISPR-C2c2 system. CRISPR-RT allows users to set up a wide range of parameters, making it highly flexible for current and future research in CRISPR-based RNAediting. CRISPR-RT covers major model organisms and can be easily extended tocover other species. CRISPR-RT will empower researchers in RNA editing.Availability and implementation: Freely available athttp://bioinfolab.miamioh.edu/CRISPR-RT.Contact: liangc@miamioh.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>LightDock: a new multi-scale approach to protein-protein docking.Motivation: Computational prediction of protein-protein complex structure bydocking can provide structural and mechanistic insights for protein interactions of biomedical interest. However, current methods struggle with difficult cases,such as those involving flexible proteins, low-affinity complexes or transientinteractions. A major challenge is how to efficiently sample the structural andenergetic landscape of the association at different resolution levels, given thateach scoring function is often highly coupled to a specific type of searchmethod. Thus, new methodologies capable of accommodating multi-scaleconformational flexibility and scoring are strongly needed.Results: We describe here a new multi-scale protein-protein docking methodology, LightDock, capable of accommodating conformational flexibility and a variety ofscoring functions at different resolution levels. Implicit use of normal modesduring the search and atomic/coarse-grained combined scoring functions yieldedimproved predictive results with respect to state-of-the-art rigid-body docking, especially in flexible cases.Availability and implementation: The source code of the software and installationinstructions are available for download at https://life.bsc.es/pid/lightdock/.Contact: juanf@bsc.es.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>An automated tool for obtaining QSAR-ready series of compounds using semantic webtechnologies.Summary: We describe an application (Collector) for obtaining series of compoundsannotated with bioactivity data, ready to be used for the development ofquantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) models. The tool extractsdata from the 'Open Pharmacological Space' (OPS) developed by the Open PHACTSproject, using as input a valid name of the biological target. Collector uses theOPS ontologies for expanding the query using all known target synonyms andextracts compounds with bioactivity data against the target from multiplesources. The extracted data can be filtered to retain only drug-like compoundsand the bioactivities can be automatically summarised to assign a single valueper compound, yielding data ready to be used for QSAR modeling. The data obtainedis locally stored facilitating the traceability and auditability of the process. Collector was used successfully for the development of models for toxicityendpoints within the eTOX project.Availability and implementation: The software is available athttp://phi.upf.edu/collector. The source code is located athttps://github.com/phi-grib/Collector and is free for use under the GPL3 license.The web version is hosted at http://collector.upf.edu/.Contact: manuel.pastor@upf.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Interactive network visualization in Jupyter notebooks: visJS2jupyter.Motivation: Network biology is widely used to elucidate mechanisms of disease andbiological processes. The ability to interact with biological networks isimportant for hypothesis generation and to give researchers an intuitiveunderstanding of the data. We present visJS2jupyter, a tool designed to embedinteractive networks in Jupyter notebooks to streamline network analysis and topromote reproducible research.Results: The tool provides functions for performing and visualizing usefulnetwork operations in biology, including network overlap, network propagationaround a focal set of genes, and co-localization of two sets of seed genes.visJS2jupyter uses the JavaScript library vis.js to create interactive networksdisplayed within Jupyter notebook cells with features including drag, click,hover, and zoom. We demonstrate the functionality of visJS2jupyter applied to abiological question, by creating a network propagation visualization toprioritize risk-related genes in autism.Availability and implementation: The visJS2jupyter package is distributed under the MIT License. The source code, documentation and installation instructions arefreely available on GitHub at https://github.com/ucsd-ccbb/visJS2jupyter. Thepackage can be downloaded at https://pypi.python.org/pypi/visJS2jupyter.Contact: sbrosenthal@ucsd.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.


<separator>Snaptron: querying splicing patterns across tens of thousands of RNA-seq samples.Motivation: As more and larger genomics studies appear, there is a growing needfor comprehensive and queryable cross-study summaries. These enable researchersto leverage vast datasets that would otherwise be difficult to obtain.Results: Snaptron is a search engine for summarized RNA sequencing data with aquery planner that leverages R-tree, B-tree and inverted indexing strategies torapidly execute queries over 146 million exon-exon splice junctions from over70?000 human RNA-seq samples. Queries can be tailored by constraining whichjunctions and samples to consider. Snaptron can score junctions according totissue specificity or other criteria, and can score samples according to therelative frequency of different splicing patterns. We describe the software andoutline biological questions that can be explored with Snaptron queries.Availability and implementation: Documentation is at http://snaptron.cs.jhu.edu. Source code is at https://github.com/ChristopherWilks/snaptron andhttps://github.com/ChristopherWilks/snaptron-experiments with a CC BY-NC 4.0license.Contact: chris.wilks@jhu.edu or langmea@cs.jhu.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Three-dimensional cardiovascular imaging-genetics: a mass univariate framework.Motivation: Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy is a strong predictor ofcardiovascular outcomes, but its genetic regulation remains largely unexplained. Conventional phenotyping relies on manual calculation of LV mass and wallthickness, but advanced cardiac image analysis presents an opportunity forhigh-throughput mapping of genotype-phenotype associations in three dimensions(3D).Results: High-resolution cardiac magnetic resonance images were automaticallysegmented in 1124 healthy volunteers to create a 3D shape model of the heart.Mass univariate regression was used to plot a 3D effect-size map for theassociation between wall thickness and a set of predictors at each vertex in the mesh. The vertices where a significant effect exists were determined by applying threshold-free cluster enhancement to boost areas of signal with spatialcontiguity. Experiments on simulated phenotypic signals and SNP replication show that this approach offers a substantial gain in statistical power for cardiacgenotype-phenotype associations while providing good control of the falsediscovery rate. This framework models the effects of genetic variation throughoutthe heart and can be automatically applied to large population cohorts.Availability and implementation: The proposed approach has been coded in an Rpackage freely available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.834610 together withthe clinical data used in this work.Contact: declan.oregan@imperial.ac.uk.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.


<separator>Morphologically constrained and data informed cell segmentation of budding yeast.Motivation: Although high-content image cytometry is becoming increasinglyroutine, processing the large amount of data acquired during time-lapseexperiments remains a challenge. The majority of approaches for automatedsingle-cell segmentation focus on flat, uniform fields of view covered with asingle layer of cells. In the increasingly popular microfluidic devices that trapindividual cells for long term imaging, these conditions are not met.Consequently, most techniques for segmentation perform poorly. Althoughpotentially constraining the generalizability of software, incorporatinginformation about the microfluidic features, flow of media and the morphology of the cells can substantially improve performance.Results: Here we present DISCO (Data Informed Segmentation of Cell Objects), aframework for using the physical constraints imposed by microfluidic traps, theshape based morphological constraints of budding yeast and temporal informationabout cell growth and motion to allow tracking and segmentation of cells inmicrofluidic devices. Using manually curated datasets, we demonstrate substantialimprovements in both tracking and segmentation when compared with existingsoftware.Availability and implementation: The MATLAB code for the algorithm and formeasuring performance is available athttps://github.com/pswain/segmentation-software and the test images and thecurated ground-truth results used for comparing the algorithms are available athttp://datashare.is.ed.ac.uk/handle/10283/2002.Contact: mcrane2@uw.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>Kfits: a software framework for fitting and cleaning outliers in kineticmeasurements.Motivation: Kinetic measurements have played an important role in elucidatingbiochemical and biophysical phenomena for over a century. While many tools foranalysing kinetic measurements exist, most require low noise levels in the data, leaving outlier measurements to be cleaned manually. This is particularly truefor protein misfolding and aggregation processes, which are extremely noisy andhence difficult to model. Understanding these processes is paramount, as they areassociated with diverse physiological processes and disorders, most notablyneurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, a better tool for analysing and cleaningprotein aggregation traces is required.Results: Here we introduce Kfits, an intuitive graphical tool for detecting andremoving noise caused by outliers in protein aggregation kinetics data. Followingits workflow allows the user to quickly and easily clean large quantities of dataand receive kinetic parameters for assessment of the results. With minoradjustments, the software can be applied to any type of kinetic measurements, notrestricted to protein aggregation.Availability and implementation: Kfits is implemented in Python and availableonline at http://kfits.reichmannlab.com, in source athttps://github.com/odedrim/kfits/, or by direct installation from PyPI (`pipinstall kfits`).Contact: danare@mail.huji.ac.il.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>NavMol 3.0: enabling the representation of metabolic reactions by blind users.Summary: The representation of metabolic reactions strongly relies onvisualization, which is a major barrier for blind users. The NavMol softwarerenders the communication and interpretation of molecular structures andreactions accessible by integrating chemoinformatics and assistive technology.NavMol 3.0 provides a molecular editor for metabolic reactions. The user canstart with templates of reactions and build from such cores. Atom-to-atom mappingenables changes in the reactants to be reflected in the products (and vice-versa)and the reaction centres to be automatically identified. Blind users can easilyinteract with the software using the keyboard and text-to-speech technology.Availability and implementation: NavMol 3.0 is free and open source under the GNUgeneral public license (GPLv3), and can be downloaded athttp://sourceforge.net/projects/navmol as a JAR file.Contact: joao@airesdesousa.com.

<separator>NGS-pipe: a flexible, easily extendable and highly configurable framework for NGSanalysis.Motivation: Next-generation sequencing is now an established method in genomics, and massive amounts of sequencing data are being generated on a regular basis.Analysis of the sequencing data is typically performed by lab-specific in-housesolutions, but the agreement of results from different facilities is often small.General standards for quality control, reproducibility and documentation aremissing.Results: We developed NGS-pipe, a flexible, transparent and easy-to-use frameworkfor the design of pipelines to analyze whole-exome, whole-genome andtranscriptome sequencing data. NGS-pipe facilitates the harmonization of genomic data analysis by supporting quality control, documentation, reproducibility,parallelization and easy adaptation to other NGS experiments.Availability and implementation: https://github.com/cbg-ethz/NGS-pipe.Contact: niko.beerenwinkel@bsse.ethz.ch.

<separator>tmVar 2.0: integrating genomic variant information from literature with dbSNP andClinVar for precision medicine.Motivation: Despite significant efforts in expert curation, clinical relevanceabout most of the 154 million dbSNP reference variants (RS) remains unknown.However, a wealth of knowledge about the variant biological function/diseaseimpact is buried in unstructured literature data. Previous studies have attemptedto harvest and unlock such information with text-mining techniques but are oflimited use because their mutation extraction results are not standardized orintegrated with curated data.Results: We propose an automatic method to extract and normalize variant mentionsto unique identifiers (dbSNP RSIDs). Our method, in benchmarking results,demonstrates a high F-measure of ~90% and compared favorably to the state of the art. Next, we applied our approach to the entire PubMed and validated the resultsby verifying that each extracted variant-gene pair matched the dbSNP annotationbased on mapped genomic position, and by analyzing variants curated in ClinVar.We then determined which text-mined variants and genes constituted noveldiscoveries. Our analysis reveals 41?889 RS numbers (associated with 9151 genes) not found in ClinVar. Moreover, we obtained a rich set worth further review:12?462 rare variants (MAF?=?0.01) in 3849 genes which are presumed to bedeleterious and not frequently found in the general population. To our knowledge,this is the first large-scale study to analyze and integrate text-mined variantdata with curated knowledge in existing databases. Our results suggest thatdatabases can be significantly enriched by text mining and that the combinedinformation can greatly assist human efforts in evaluating/prioritizing variants in genomic research.Availability and implementation: The tmVar 2.0 source code and corpus are freely available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/bionlp/Tools/tmvar/.Contact: zhiyong.lu@nih.gov.

<separator>SparseIso: a novel Bayesian approach to identify alternatively spliced isoformsfrom RNA-seq data.Motivation: Recent advances in high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)technologies have made it possible to reconstruct the full transcriptome ofvarious types of cells. It is important to accurately assemble transcripts oridentify isoforms for an improved understanding of molecular mechanisms inbiological systems.Results: We have developed a novel Bayesian method, SparseIso, to reliablyidentify spliced isoforms from RNA-seq data. A spike-and-slab prior isincorporated into the Bayesian model to enforce the sparsity for isoformidentification, effectively alleviating the problem of overfitting. A Gibbssampling procedure is further developed to simultaneously identify and quantifytranscripts from RNA-seq data. With the sampling approach, SparseIso estimatesthe joint distribution of all candidate transcripts, resulting in a significantlyimproved performance in detecting lowly expressed transcripts and multipleexpressed isoforms of genes. Both simulation study and real data analysis havedemonstrated that the proposed SparseIso method significantly outperformsexisting methods for improved transcript assembly and isoform identification.Availability and implementation: The SparseIso package is available athttp://github.com/henryxushi/SparseIso.Contact: xuan@vt.edu.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>ReMILO: reference assisted misassembly detection algorithm using short and longreads.Motivation: Contigs assembled from the second generation sequencing short readsmay contain misassemblies, and thus complicate downstream analysis or even leadto incorrect analysis results. Fortunately, with more and more sequenced species available, it becomes possible to use the reference genome of a closely relatedspecies to detect misassemblies. In addition, long reads of the third generation sequencing technology have been more and more widely used, and can also helpdetect misassemblies.Results: Here, we introduce ReMILO, a reference assisted misassembly detectionalgorithm that uses both short reads and PacBio SMRT long reads. ReMILO alignsthe initial short reads to both the contigs and reference genome, and thenconstructs a novel data structure called red-black multipositional de Bruijngraph to detect misassemblies. In addition, ReMILO also aligns the contigs tolong reads and find their differences from the long reads to detect moremisassemblies. In our performance test on short read assemblies of humanchromosome 14 data, ReMILO can detect 41.8-77.9% extensive misassemblies and33.6-54.5% local misassemblies. On hybrid short and long read assemblies ofS.pastorianus data, ReMILO can also detect 60.6-70.9% extensive misassemblies and28.6-54.0% local misassemblies.Availability and implementation: The ReMILO software can be downloaded for freeunder Artistic License 2.0 from this site: https://github.com/songc001/remilo.Contact: baoe@bjtu.edu.cn.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>4D nucleome Analysis Toolbox: analysis of Hi-C data with abnormal karyotype andtime series capabilities.Motivation: The availability of powerful analysis tools will furtherunderstanding of genome organization and its relationship to phenotype indynamical settings.Results: The 4D Nucleome Analysis Toolbox (NAT) is a user-friendly and powerfulMATLAB toolbox for time series analysis of genome-wide chromosome conformationcapture (Hi-C) data and gene expression (RNA-seq). NAT can load and normalizedata, define topologically associating domains, analyse translocations, producevisualization, and study time course data. We provide examples that include time series data sets and karyotypically abnormal cell lines demonstrating theflexibility of NAT.Availability and implementation:https://github.com/laseaman/4D_Nucleome_Analysis_Toolbox.Contact: indikar@umich.edu.

<separator>Novel approaches for bioinformatic analysis of salivary RNA sequencing data fordevelopment.Motivation: Analysis of RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) data in human saliva ischallenging. Lack of standardization and unification of the bioinformaticprocedures undermines saliva's diagnostic potential. Thus, it motivated us toperform this study.Results: We applied principal pipelines for bioinformatic analysis of smallRNA-Seq data of saliva of 98 healthy Korean volunteers including either direct orindirect mapping of the reads to the human genome using Bowtie1. Analysis ofalignments to exogenous genomes by another pipeline revealed that almost all ofthe reads map to bacterial genomes. Thus, salivary exRNA has fundamentalproperties that warrant the design of unique additional steps while performingthe bioinformatic analysis. Our pipelines can serve as potential guidelines forprocessing of RNA-Seq data of human saliva.Availability and implementation: Processing and analysis results of theexperimental data generated by the exceRpt (v4.6.3) small RNA-seq pipeline(github.gersteinlab.org/exceRpt) are available from exRNA atlas(exrna-atlas.org). Alignment to exogenous genomes and their quantificationresults were used in this paper for the analyses of small RNAs of exogenousorigin.Contact: dtww@ucla.edu.

<separator>Deconvolution of multiple infections in Plasmodium falciparum from highthroughput sequencing data.Motivation: The presence of multiple infecting strains of the malarial parasitePlasmodium falciparum affects key phenotypic traits, including drug resistanceand risk of severe disease. Advances in protocols and sequencing technology have made it possible to obtain high-coverage genome-wide sequencing data from bloodsamples and blood spots taken in the field. However, analyzing and interpretingsuch data is challenging because of the high rate of multiple infections present.Results: We have developed a statistical method and implementation fordeconvolving multiple genome sequences present in an individual with mixedinfections. The software package DEploid uses haplotype structure within areference panel of clonal isolates as a prior for haplotypes present in a givensample. It estimates the number of strains, their relative proportions and thehaplotypes presented in a sample, allowing researchers to study multipleinfection in malaria with an unprecedented level of detail.Availability and implementation: The open source implementation DEploid is freelyavailable at https://github.com/mcveanlab/DEploid under the conditions of theGPLv3 license. An R version is available athttps://github.com/mcveanlab/DEploid-r.Contact: joe.zhu@bdi.ox.ac.uk or gil.mcvean@bdi.ox.ac.uk.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.,

<separator>Orthologue chemical space and its influence on target prediction.Motivation: In silico approaches often fail to utilize bioactivity data availablefor orthologous targets due to insufficient evidence highlighting the benefit forsuch an approach. Deeper investigation into orthologue chemical space and itsinfluence toward expanding compound and target coverage is necessary to improvethe confidence in this practice.Results: Here we present analysis of the orthologue chemical space in ChEMBL and PubChem and its impact on target prediction. We highlight the number ofconflicting bioactivities between human and orthologues is low and annotationsare overall compatible. Chemical space analysis shows orthologues are chemically dissimilar to human with high intra-group similarity, suggesting they couldeffectively extend the chemical space modelled. Based on these observations, weshow the benefit of orthologue inclusion in terms of novel target coverage. Wealso benchmarked predictive models using a time-series split and also usingbioactivities from Chemistry Connect and HTS data available at AstraZeneca,showing that orthologue bioactivity inclusion statistically improved performance.Availability and implementation: Orthologue-based bioactivity prediction and the compound training set are available at www.github.com/lhm30/PIDGINv2.Contact: ab454@cam.ac.uk.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.

<separator>biospear: an R package for biomarker selection in penalized Cox regression.Summary: The R package biospear allows selecting the biomarkers with thestrongest impact on survival and on the treatment effect in high-dimensional Cox models, and estimating expected survival probabilities. Most of the implementedapproaches are based on penalized regression techniques.Availability and implementation: The package is available on the CRAN.(https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=biospear).Contact: stefan.michiels@gustaveroussy.fr.Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.


<separator>This letter to the editor of Planning Magazine was written in response to an article published in the June 2016 issue of the magazine entitled Research You Can Use-The five most-cited planning researchers. To this day the letter has remained unaddressed by the editor. Therefore, I have taken the liberty to submit it to the Journal of Health & Medical Informatics, since some of the so called most-cited authors have also published on health-related topics, and the points I make in my letter below are valid across multiple disciplinary fields.

<separator>Citizens perceptions in this analysis suggest a number of barriers to health-care access and utilization across the eight African countries studied. On average, across the 8 countries, Afrobarometer fieldworkers did not find health facilities in about 40% of all the enumeration areas (EA) included in the survey. Generally, across the 8 countries, about 34% of the respondents reported that they could not have contact for health care when there needed it. Among those who accessed health care during the previous year, a cumulative 31% found it difficult or very difficult to get the care they needed. Averagely, only 14% of all the respondents surveyed indicated that they obtained their needed medical care  right way implying that a significant proportion of people wasted longer time prior to receiving their health care needs. Close to half (46%) of citizens in the eight countries noted that their governments were performing fairly badly or very badly as far as improving basic health services were concerned with only 10% of the citizens said their government were performing very well. In all the 8 countries tracked since 2005, negative evaluations of their governments have increased by about 13 percentage points over the past decade. Therefore, governments in the African sub-region need to enhance their efforts to promote accessibility to basic health care services which is a fundamental human right enshrined in the Alma-Ata Declaration.

<separator>Word of mouth publicity has been casting substantial impact on hospitals business. This has become even more impactful with increasing use of online rating and reviews. A lower average rating can potentially affect the hospitals business negatively. Average rating gets considerably lowered with customers giving least rating to a hospital. This study attempts at identifying components that leads a customer to give least rating to a hospital. The study analyses 669 descriptive reviews accompanying a rating by qualitatively analysing and grouping them in component of dissatisfactions (CoD). Each CoD was then tested for their association with least online rating to identify significant ones. Out of 5 CoD, 3 were found significant (Medical Care, Conduct and Money making attitude) while remaining 2 were not (System and facilities and Expensiveness). Amongst CoD that were found significant, no significant difference was found in between them in their strength of association with least online rating.

<separator>Healthcare applications of mobile phones are steadily gaining popularity over last few years. With the increasing penetration of mobile networks in remote rural villages in India, mobile phones are becoming an important tool for enhancing doctor-patient communication. The mobile technology is increasingly enhancing functionalities of handheld devices, smart phones and PDAs, which are potentially replacing the use of PC, based alternatives while supporting mobility needs of patients and medical practitioners. The study looks at the facilitators of them Health program (mobile based reporting by Front Line Workers in public health) in Saharsa district of Bihar state in India. Data was collected in July 2017. 109 FLWs were contacted for the study. The results tell us that education plays an important role in mobile based reporting system. Age of the respondents does not relate to the mobile phone based reporting system. The willingness to use the mobile phone for reporting is at 80% taken overall. Across age group the worry regarding the lack of hard copy of data is very less and stood at overall 40% level. Respondents from all age group indicated that the timing of the reporting was appropriate and it stood at 85%. The logistic regression tells us that appropriateness of the reporting time increases by 4.1 times, when the FLW receives the needed service from the mobile platform. Effectiveness of the work of the FLW would decrease by 89% if she is worried about the lack of hard copy of the data. Willingness to continue the mobile phone for reporting would increase by 4.34 times, for those FLW, who are recommending the program to continue. Appropriateness of the reporting time increases by 5.26 times, when the FLW recommends continuing the program. The mobile based reporting system generates the real time data. The same can be used to create dashboards for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG). The tracking can be created at state or national level. Even the district level dashboards can be created. The data from the front line workers will get used on real time basis. The action on certain aspect of the program can be very quick.

<separator>Context: Hypoventilation and apnea after epidural morphine is a serious concern after surgery and an issue in chronic pain. A low dose of naloxone added to morphine can prevent this complication. Objective: To determine that the low dose of naloxone added to epidural morphine analgesic could change the effect of this opioid in chronic low back pain. In addition, we evaluate its effect on respiratory function and patient satisfaction. Patients: Twenty-seven adults suffering from chronic low back pain (LBP) who were candidates for epidural injection treatment. Intervention: This was a randomized double-blind, uniform crossover, controlled clinical trial. The patients were treated with mixture of morphine-bupivacaine and mixture of morphine-bupivacaine-naloxone. Main outcome measure: The primary goals were to evaluate pain intensity and respiratory function after epidural injection of morphine or morphine combined with naloxone. Secondary end-points were the incidence and the side effects (pruritus, nausea, vomiting, and urinary retention) of neuraxial injection of morphine or morphine combined with naloxone for 14 days after each epidural injection. Results: There was no significant difference between morphine and morphine combined with naloxone on mean peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2m), the lowest peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2), and the respiratory disturbance index (RDI). Morphine combined with naloxone seemed to decrease pain more than morphine alone, but the result was not significant (p=0.2116). In the group that received morphine and naloxone, pain decreased sooner by half from baseline pain (at day 2 versus at day 6) than the other group. Vomiting, pruritus, and urinary retention were seen with no significant difference in both groups. Conclusion: We conclude that epidural administration of naloxone can preserve the analgesic effect of morphine in treatment of chronic LBP. Naloxone does not have any effects on respiratory function. It reduces itching, nausea, and pruritus after epidural injection of morphine. We cannot be certain whether this is the ideal dose or whether any changes in the doses might produce fewer side effects without interfering with analgesia.

a120=.The author attempts to postulate a new volumetric complaints and adverse events trending method for holistic risk based statistical trending using a new control chart which is based on the theory of a U chart, as it pertains to medical device failure related adverse events. Mathematical rationale is provided for various control chart parameters like subgroup size and subgroup frequency and correlations to existing literature have been made to justify conclusions. Also, the article features discussion on false alarms and how to use Minitab to minimize them while monitoring incoming complaint variability using a U chart and consequently, the J chart.

<separator>Interactive health games (IHG) are fun, experimental, challenging as well as powerful tools that have the potential to change the patients behaviour, attitudes and improve their health. IHG involve well-designed intent challenges and follow roles moving toward a goal. In the last decade, a wide variety of IHG has been developed. The classification of these games is based on game subject, health subject and player subject. Along with the potential future utilization of IHG, there are limitations to a wider application such as the disparity in the players cognitive abilities and the need to identify the kinds of learning and training support.

<separator>Current Virtual Reality (VR) applications in healthcare demonstrate potential abilities to address cognitive, psychological, motor, functional impairments and opportunities for training and education of clinical practitioners. Bearing in mind the overall wellness of their communities, healthcare officials had supported the idea of incorporating modern technology by increasing the budget shares and arranging for an access to advanced equipment and professional expertise. Clinicians are becoming more interested in applying VR simulation into their research and clinical trials because of the encouraging feedback published in the medical literature across a wide range of clinical health conditions. Numerous published articles propose novel concepts on applications VR technologies and their potential on disease prevention and management. Finally, the ability of sharing data collected by VR simulation systems through communication networks and electronic health records make it more attractive for the reason that it plays a role in decision making for specific case studies and distance learning.


<separator>Quality Assurance of Chemical Ingredient Classification for the National Drug File – Reference Terminology The National Drug File - Reference Terminology (NDF-RT) is a large and complex drug terminology consisting of several classification hierarchies on top of an extensive collection of drug concepts. These hierarchies provide important information about clinical drugs, e.g., their chemical ingredients, mechanisms of action, dosage form and physiological effects. Within NDF-RT such information is represented using tens of thousands of roles connecting drugs to classifications. In previous studies, we have introduced various kinds of Abstraction Networks to summarize the content and structure of terminologies in order to facilitate their visual comprehension, and support quality assurance of terminologies. However, these previous kinds of Abstraction Networks are not appropriate for summarizing the NDF-RT classification hierarchies, due to its unique structure. In this paper, we present the novel Ingredient Abstraction Network (IAbN) to summarize, visualize and support the audit of NDF-RT's Chemical Ingredients hierarchy and its associated drugs. A common theme in our quality assurance framework is to use characterizations of sets of concepts, revealed by the Abstraction Network structure, to capture concepts, the modeling of which is more complex than for other concepts. For the IAbN, we characterize drug ingredient concepts as more complex if they belong to IAbN groups with multiple parent groups. We show that such concepts have a statistically significantly higher rate of errors than a control sample and identify two especially common patterns of errors.

<separator>Using Scenarios and Personas to Enhance the Effectiveness of Heuristic Usability Evaluations for Older Adults and Their Care Team OBJECTIVE: Using heuristics to evaluate user experience is a common methodology for human-computer interaction studies. One challenge of this method is the inability to tailor results towards specific end-user needs. This manuscript reports on a method that uses validated scenarios and personas of older adults and care team members to enhance heuristics evaluations of the usability of commercially available personal health records for homebound older adults. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our work extends the Chisnell and Redish heuristic evaluation methodology by using a protocol that relies on multiple expert reviews of each system. It further standardizes the heuristic evaluation process through the incorporation of task-based scenarios. RESULTS: We were able to use the modified version of the Chisnell and Redish heuristic evaluation methodology to identify potential usability challenges of two commercially available personal health record systems. This allowed us to: (1) identify potential usability challenges for specific types of users, (2) describe improvements that would be valuable to all end-users of the system, and (3) better understand how the interactions of different users may vary within a single personal health record. CONCLUSIONS: The methodology described in this paper may help designers of consumer health information technology tools, such as personal health records, understand the needs of diverse end-user populations. Such methods may be particularly helpful when designing systems for populations that are difficult to recruit for end-user evaluations through traditional methods.

<separator>Finding Patients Using Similarity Measures in a Rare Diseases-Oriented Clinical Data Warehouse: Dr. Warehouse and the Needle in the Needle Stack OBJECTIVE: In the context of rare diseases, it may be helpful to detect patients with similar medical histories, diagnoses and outcomes from a large number of cases with automated methods. To reduce the time to find new cases, we developed a method to find similar patients given an index case leveraging data from the electronic health records. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used the clinical data warehouse of a children academic hospital in Paris, France (Necker-Enfants Malades), containing about 400,000 patients. Our model was based on a vector space model (VSM) to compute the similarity distance between an index patient and all the patients of the data warehouse. The dimensions of the VSM were built upon Unified Medical Language System concepts extracted from clinical narratives stored in the clinical data warehouse. The VSM was enhanced using three parameters: a pertinence score (TF-IDF of the concepts), the polarity of the concept (negated/not negated) and the minimum number of concepts in common. We evaluated this model by displaying the most similar patients for five different rare diseases: Lowe Syndrome (LOWE), Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB), Activated PI3K delta Syndrome (APDS), Rett Syndrome (RETT) and Dowling Meara (EBS-DM), from the clinical data warehouse representing 18, 103, 21, 84 and 7 patients respectively. RESULTS: The percentages of index patients returning at least one true positive similar patient in the Top30 similar patients were 94% for LOWE, 97% for DEB, 86% for APDS, 71% for EBS-DM and 99% for RETT. The mean number of patients with the exact same genetic diseases among the 30 returned patients was 51%. CONCLUSION: This tool offers new perspectives in a translational context to identify patients for genetic research. Moreover, when new molecular bases are discovered, our strategy will help to identify additional eligible patients for genetic screening.

<separator>Development and Classification of a Robust Inventory of Near Real-Time Outcome Measurements for Assessing Information Technology Interventions in Health Care OBJECTIVE: To develop and classify an inventory of near real-time outcome measures for assessing information technology (IT) interventions in health care and assess their relevance as perceived by experts in the field. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To verify the robustness and coverage of a previously published inventory of measures and taxonomy, we conducted semi-structured interviews with clinical and administrative leaders from a large care delivery system to collect suggestions of outcome measures that can be calculated with data available in electronic format for near real-time monitoring of EHR implementations. We combined these measures with the most commonly reported in the literature. We then conducted two online surveys with subject-matter experts to collect their perceptions of the relevance of the measures, and identify other potentially relevant measures. RESULTS: With input from experienced health care leaders and informaticists, we developed an inventory of 102 outcome measures. These measures were classified into a taxonomy of commonly used measures around the categories of quality, productivity, and safety. Safety measures were rated as most relevant by subject-matter experts, especially those measuring medication processes. Clinician satisfaction and measures assessing mean time to complete tasks and time spent on electronic documentation were also rated as highly relevant. DISCUSSION: By expanding the coverage of our previously published inventory and taxonomy, we expect to help providers, health IT vendors and researchers to more effectively and consistently monitor the impact of EHR implementations in near real-time, and report more standardized outcomes in future studies. We identified several measures not commonly assessed by previous studies of IT implementations, especially those of safety and productivity, which deserve more attention from the broader informatics community. CONCLUSION: Our inventory of measures and taxonomy will help researchers identify gaps in their measurement approaches and report more standardized measurements of IT interventions that could be shared among researchers, hopefully facilitating comparison across future studies and increasing our understanding of the impact of IT interventions in health care.

<separator>A Cascaded Approach for Chinese Clinical Text De-Identification With Less Annotation Effort With rapid adoption of Electronic Health Records (EHR) in China, an increasing amount of clinical data has been available to support clinical research. Clinical data secondary use usually requires de-identification of personal information to protect patient privacy. Since manually de-identification of free clinical text requires significant amount of human work, developing an automated de-identification system is necessary. While there are many de-identification systems available for English clinical text, designing a de-identification system for Chinese clinical text faces many challenges such as unavailability of necessary lexical resources and sparsity of patient health information (PHI) in Chinese clinical text. In this paper, we designed a de-identification pipeline taking advantage of both rule-based and machine learning techniques. Our method, in particular, can effectively construct a data set with dense PHI information, which saves annotation time significantly for subsequent supervised learning. We experiment on a dataset of 3000 heterogeneous clinical documents to evaluate the annotation cost and the de-identification performance. Our approach can increase the efficiency of the annotation effort by over 60% while reaching performance as high as over 90% measured by F score. We demonstrate that combing rule-based and machine learning is an effective way to reduce the annotation cost and achieve high performance in Chinese clinical text de-identification task.
 
<separator>Elucidating High-Dimensional Cancer Hallmark Annotation via Enriched Ontology MOTIVATION: Cancer hallmark annotation is a promising technique that could discover novel knowledge about cancer from the biomedical literature. The automated annotation of cancer hallmarks could reveal relevant cancer transformation processes in the literature or extract the articles that correspond to the cancer hallmark of interest. It acts as a complementary approach that can retrieve knowledge from massive text information, advancing numerous focused studies in cancer research. Nonetheless, the high-dimensional nature of cancer hallmark annotation imposes a unique challenge. RESULTS: To address the curse of dimensionality, we compared multiple cancer hallmark annotation methods on 1580 PubMed abstracts. Based on the insights, a novel approach, UDT-RF, which makes use of ontological features is proposed. It expands the feature space via the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) ontology graph and utilizes novel feature selections for elucidating the high-dimensional cancer hallmark annotation space. To demonstrate its effectiveness, state-of-the-art methods are compared and evaluated by a multitude of performance metrics, revealing the full performance spectrum on the full set of cancer hallmarks. Several case studies are conducted, demonstrating how the proposed approach could reveal novel insights into cancers. AVAILABILITY: https://github.com/cskyan/chmannot.

<separator>Automatic Identification of High Impact Articles in PubMed to Support Clinical Decision Making OBJECTIVES: The practice of evidence-based medicine involves integrating the latest best available evidence into patient care decisions. Yet, critical barriers exist for clinicians' retrieval of evidence that is relevant for a particular patient from primary sources such as randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses. To help address those barriers, we investigated machine learning algorithms that find clinical studies with high clinical impact from PubMed®. METHODS: Our machine learning algorithms use a variety of features including bibliometric features (e.g., citation count), social media attention, journal impact factors, and citation metadata. The algorithms were developed and evaluated with a gold standard composed of 502 high impact clinical studies that are referenced in 11 clinical evidence-based guidelines on the treatment of various diseases. We tested the following hypotheses: (1) our high impact classifier outperforms a state-of-the-art classifier based on citation metadata and citation terms, and PubMed's® relevance sort algorithm; and (2) the performance of our high impact classifier does not decrease significantly after removing proprietary features such as citation count. RESULTS: The mean top 20 precision of our high impact classifier was 34% versus 11% for the state-of-the-art classifier and 4% for PubMed's® relevance sort (p=0.009); and the performance of our high impact classifier did not decrease significantly after removing proprietary features (mean top 20 precision=34% vs. 36%; p=0.085). CONCLUSION: The high impact classifier, using features such as bibliometrics, social media attention and MEDLINE® metadata, outperformed previous approaches and is a promising alternative to identifying high impact studies for clinical decision support.

<separator>ctPath: Demixing Pathway Crosstalk Effect From Transcriptomics Data for Differential Pathway Identification Identifying differentially expressed pathways (DEPs) plays important roles in understanding tumor etiology and promoting clinical treatment of cancer or other diseases. By assuming gene expression to be a sparse non-negative linear combination of hidden pathway signals, we propose a pathway crosstalk-based transcriptomics data analysis method (ctPath) for identifying differentially expressed pathways. Biologically, pathways of different functions work in concert at the systematic level. The proposed method interrogates the crosstalks between pathways and discovers hidden pathway signals by mapping high-dimensional transcriptomics data into a low-dimensional pathway space. The resulted pathway signals reflect the activity level of pathways after removing pathway crosstalk effect and allow a robust identification of DEPs from inherently complex and noisy transcriptomics data. CtPath can also correct incomplete and inaccurate pathway annotations which frequently occur in public repositories. Experimental results on both simulation data and real-world cancer data demonstrate the superior performance of ctPath over other popular approaches. R code for ctPath is available for non-commercial use at the URL http://micblab.iim.ac.cn/Download/.

<separator>CHI: A Contemporaneous Health Index for Degenerative Disease Monitoring Using Longitudinal Measurements In this paper, we develop a novel formulation for contemporaneous patient risk monitoring by exploiting the emerging data-rich environment in many healthcare applications, where an abundance of longitudinal data that reflect the degeneration of the health condition can be continuously collected. Our objective, and the developed formulation, is fundamentally different from many existing risk score models for different healthcare applications, which mostly focus on predicting the likelihood of a certain outcome at a pre-specified time. Rather, our formulation translates multivariate longitudinal measurements into a contemporaneous health index (CHI) that captures patient condition changes over the course of progression. Another significant feature of our formulation is that, CHI can be estimated with or without label information, different from other risk score models strictly based on supervised learning. To develop this formulation, we focus on the degenerative disease conditions, for which we could utilize the monotonic progression characteristic (either towards disease or recovery) to learn CHI. Such a domain knowledge leads us to a novel learning formulation, and on top of that, we further generalize this formulation with a capacity to incorporate label information if available. We further develop algorithms to mitigate the challenges associated with the nonsmooth convex optimization problem by first identifying its dual reformulation as a constrained smooth optimization problem, and then, using the block coordinate descent algorithm to iteratively solve the optimization with a derived efficient projection at each iteration. Extensive numerical studies are performed on both synthetic datasets and real-world applications on Alzheimer's disease and Surgical Site Infection, which demonstrate the utility and efficacy of the proposed method on degenerative conditions that include a wide range of applications.

<separator>Hiding Electronic Patient Record (EPR) in Medical Images: A High Capacity and Computationally Efficient Technique for E-Healthcare Applications A high capacity and semi-reversible data hiding scheme based on Pixel Repetition Method (PRM) and hybrid edge detection for scalable medical images has been proposed in this paper. PRM has been used to scale up the small sized image (seed image) and hybrid edge detection ensures that no important edge information is missed. The scaled up version of seed image has been divided into 2×2 non overlapping blocks. In each block there is one seed pixel whose status decides the number of bits to be embedded in the remaining three pixels of that block. The Electronic Patient Record (EPR)/data have been embedded by using Least Significant and Intermediate Significant Bit Substitution (ISBS). The RC4 encryption has been used to add an additional security layer for embedded EPR/data. The proposed scheme has been tested for various medical and general images and compared with some state of art techniques in the field. The experimental results reveal that the proposed scheme besides being semi-reversible and computationally efficient is capable of handling high payload and as such can be used effectively for electronic healthcare applications.

<separator>Word Embeddings and Recurrent Neural Networks Based on Long-Short Term Memory Nodes in Supervised Biomedical Word Sense Disambiguation Word sense disambiguation helps identifying the proper sense of ambiguous words in text. With large terminologies such as the UMLS Metathesaurus ambiguities appear and highly effective disambiguation methods are required. Supervised learning algorithm methods are used as one of the approaches to perform disambiguation. Features extracted from the context of an ambiguous word are used to identify the proper sense of such a word. The type of features have an impact on machine learning methods, thus affect disambiguation performance. In this work, we have evaluated several types of features derived from the context of the ambiguous word and we have explored as well more global features derived from MEDLINE using word embeddings. Results show that word embeddings improve the performance of more traditional features and allow as well using recurrent neural network classifiers based on Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) nodes. The combination of unigrams and word embeddings with an SVM sets a new state of the art performance with a macro accuracy of 95.97 in the MSH WSD data set.

<separator>Development of Simulation Optimization Methods for Solving Patient Referral Problems in the Hospital-Collaboration Environment This research studied a patient referral problem among multiple cooperative hospitals for sharing imaging services' referrals. The proposed problem consisted of many types of patients and the uncertainty associated with the number of patients of each type, patients' arrival time, and patients' medical operation time, leading to a difficulty in finding solutions due to the uncertain environment. This research used system simulation to construct a model and develop a simulation optimization method, combining the heuristic algorithm (patient referral mechanism) with the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method, to determine a better way to refer patients from one hospital (referring hospital) to another (recipient hospital) to receive certain imaging services. After the simulated model was verified and validated, three patient referral mechanisms to dispatch referring patients to the appropriate recipient hospitals were proposed. Based on the numerical results, the findings showed that Mechanism 2, transferring patients to the hospital with the shortest waiting time, had good performance in both scenarios: allowing patient referrals among all hospitals and limiting the patients' waiting time. Finally, this study presents the conclusions and some directions for future research.

<separator>Monitoring Stress With a Wrist Device Using Context Being able to detect stress as it occurs can greatly contribute to dealing with its negative health and economic consequences. However, detecting stress in real life with an unobtrusive wrist device is a challenging task. The objective of this study is to develop a method for stress detection that can accurately, continuously and unobtrusively monitor psychological stress in real life. First, we explore the problem of stress detection using machine learning and signal processing techniques in laboratory conditions, and then we apply the extracted laboratory knowledge to real-life data. We propose a novel context-based stress-detection method. The method consists of three machine-learning components: a laboratory stress detector that is trained on laboratory data and detects short-term stress every 2min; an activity recognizer that continuously recognizes the user's activity and thus provides context information; and a context-based stress detector that uses the outputs of the laboratory stress detector, activity recognizer and other contexts, in order to provide the final decision on 20-min intervals. Experiments on 55days of real-life data showed that the method detects (recalls) 70% of the stress events with a precision of 95%.

<separator>A Bayesian System to Detect and Characterize Overlapping Outbreaks Outbreaks of infectious diseases such as influenza are a significant threat to human health. Because there are different strains of influenza which can cause independent outbreaks, and influenza can affect demographic groups at different rates and times, there is a need to recognize and characterize multiple outbreaks of influenza. This paper describes a Bayesian system that uses data from emergency department patient care reports to create epidemiological models of overlapping outbreaks of influenza. Clinical findings are extracted from patient care reports using natural language processing. These findings are analyzed by a case detection system to create disease likelihoods that are passed to a multiple outbreak detection system. We evaluated the system using real and simulated outbreaks. The results show that this approach can recognize and characterize overlapping outbreaks of influenza. We describe several extensions that appear promising.








































